############# ((acnA) AND (prpC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 2;7(1):1352. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01552-3.

Mechanistic insights into manganese oxidation of a soil-borne Mn(II)-oxidizing
Escherichia coli strain by global proteomic and genetic analyses.

Wang Z(1), Wang J(2), Liu J(1), Chen H(1), Li M(1), Li L(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)Agricultural Bio-resources Institute, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Fuzhou, 350003, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, China. lilin@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

An iTRAQ-based comparative and quantitative proteomics analysis of a soil-borne
Mn(II)-oxidizing bacterium, Escherichia coli MB266, was conducted during the
exponential and stationary growth phases. A total of 1850 proteins were
identified in 4 samples, of which 373 and 456 proteins were significantly up- or 
down-regulated in at least one pairwise comparison, respectively. The iTRAQ data 
indicated that several enzymes involved in fatty acid metabolism (i.e., FabA,
FabD and FabZ) and pyruvate metabolism (particularly pyruvate oxidase PoxB) were 
significantly up-regulated, while those related to the tricarboxylic acid cycle
(such as FrdB, FumB and AcnA) and methylcitrate cycle (i.e., PrpC) were
inactivated in the presence of 1 mM Mn(II); the amounts of some stress response
and signal transduction system-related proteins (i.e., Spy) were remarkably
increased, and the cold shock protein CspD was significantly up-regulated during 
the exponential growth phase. However, all verified heat shock proteins remained 
unchanged. The reactive oxygen species response and some redox enzymes might also
be involved in Mn oxidation processes. The involvement of several cellular
proteins in Mn(II) oxidation, including PoxB, Spy and MCO266, was further
confirmed by gene disruption and expression complementation experiments. Based on
these results, a signal transduction mechanism coupled to Mn oxidation was
proposed.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01552-3 
PMCID: PMC5430989
PMID: 28465578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((allR) AND (allR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Nov;154(Pt 11):3366-3378. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2008/020016-0.

The transcription regulator AllR senses both allantoin and glyoxylate and
controls a set of genes for degradation and reutilization of purines.

Hasegawa A(1), Ogasawara H(1), Kori A(1), Teramoto J(1), Ishihama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8584, 
Japan.

Purines are degraded via uric acid to yield allantoin. Under anaerobic
conditions, allantoin is further degraded via carbamoylphosphate to NH(4)+ to
provide a nitrogen source and, under aerobic conditions, to 3-phosphoglycerate
via glyoxylate for energy production. In this study, we found that a DNA-binding 
transcription factor AllR, together with AllS, plays a key role in switching
control of two pathways, nitrogen assimilation and energy production. The
repressor function of AllR is activated in the presence of allantoin, the common 
substrate for both pathways, leading to repression of the genes for energy
production. On the other hand, when glyoxylate is accumulated, AllR is
inactivated for derepression of the pathway for energy production. RutR, the
master regulator for pyrimidines and arginine, is also involved in this
pathway-switching control.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/020016-0 
PMID: 18957590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):16476-91. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Glyoxylate and pyruvate are antagonistic effectors of the Escherichia coli IclR
transcriptional regulator.

Lorca GL(1), Ezersky A, Lunin VV, Walker JR, Altamentova S, Evdokimova E, Vedadi 
M, Bochkarev A, Savchenko A.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6,
Canada. glorca@ufl.edu

The Escherichia coli isocitrate lyase regulator (IclR) regulates the expression
of the glyoxylate bypass operon (aceBAK). Founding member of a large family of
common fold transcriptional regulators, IclR comprises a DNA binding domain that 
interacts with the operator sequence and a C-terminal domain (C-IclR) that binds 
a hitherto unknown small molecule. We screened a chemical library of more than
150 metabolic scaffolds using a high-throughput protein stability assay to
identify molecules that bind IclR and then tested the active compounds in in
vitro assays of operator binding. Glyoxylate and pyruvate, identified by this
method, bound the C-IclR domain with KD values of 0.9+/-0.2 and 156.2+/-7.9
microM, as defined by isothermal titration calorimetry. Both compounds altered
IclR interactions with operator DNA in electrophoretic mobility shift assays but 
showed an antagonistic effect. Glyoxylate disrupted the formation of the
IclR/operator complex in vitro by favoring the inactive dimeric state of the
protein, whereas pyruvate increased the binding of IclR to the aceBAK promoter by
stabilizing the active tetrameric form of the protein. Structures of the C-IclR
domain alone and in complex with each effector were determined at 2.3 A,
confirming the binding of both molecules in the effector recognition site
previously characterized for the other representative of the family, the E. coli 
AllR regulator. Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated the importance of
hydrophobic patch formed by Met-146, Leu-154, Leu-220, and Leu-143 in
interactions with effector molecules. In general, our strategy of combining
chemical screens with functional assays and structural studies has uncovered two 
small molecules with antagonistic effects that regulate the IclR-dependent
transcription of the aceBAK operon.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610838200 
PMID: 17426033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Biol. 2006 May 5;358(3):810-28. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Structural and biochemical study of effector molecule recognition by the E.coli
glyoxylate and allantoin utilization regulatory protein AllR.

Walker JR(1), Altamentova S, Ezersky A, Lorca G, Skarina T, Kudritska M, Ball LJ,
Bochkarev A, Savchenko A.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Center for Structural Proteomics, Best Institute, 112 College St.,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G1L6 Canada.

The interaction of Escherichia coli AllR regulator with operator DNA is disrupted
by the effector molecule glyoxylate. This is a general, yet uncharacterized
regulatory mechanism for the large IclR family of transcriptional regulators to
which AllR belongs. The crystal structures of the C-terminal effector-binding
domain of AllR regulator and its complex with glyoxylate were determined at 1.7
and 1.8 A, respectively. Residues involved in glyoxylate binding were explored in
vitro and in vivo. Altering the residues Cys217, Ser234 and Ser236 resulted in
glyoxylate-independent repression by AllR. Sequence analysis revealed low
conservation of amino acid residues participating in effector binding among IclR 
regulators, which reflects potential chemical diversity of effector molecules,
recognized by members of this family. Comparing the AllR structure to that of
Thermotoga maritima TM0065, the other representative of the IclR family that has 
been structurally characterized, indicates that both proteins assume similar
quaternary structures as a dimer of dimers. Mutations in the tetramerization
region, which in AllR involve the Cys135-Cys142 region, resulted in dissociation 
of AllR tetramer to dimers in vitro and were functionally inactive in vivo.
Glyoxylate does not appear to function through the inhibition of tetramerization.
Using sedimentation velocity, glyoxylate was shown to conformationally change the
AllR tetramer as well as monomer and dimer resulting in altered outline of AllR
molecules.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.02.034 
PMID: 16546208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Biol. 2002 Dec 6;324(4):599-610.

Regulation of the Escherichia coli allantoin regulon: coordinated function of the
repressor AllR and the activator AllS.

Rintoul MR(1), Cusa E, Baldomà L, Badia J, Reitzer L, Aguilar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona,
Avda. Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The allantoin regulon of Escherichia coli, formed by three operons expressed from
promoters allA(P), gcl(P) and allD(P), is involved in the anaerobic utilization
of allantoin as nitrogen source. The expression of these operons is under the
control of the repressor AllR. The hyperinduction of one of these promoters
(allD(P)) by allantoin in an AllR defective mutant suggested the action of
another regulator, presumably of activator type. In this work we have identified 
ybbS (proposed gene name allS), divergently transcribed from allA, as the gene
encoding this activator. Analysis of the expression of the three structural
operons in DeltaallS mutant showed that the expression from allD(P) was
abolished, suggesting that AllS is essential for the expression of the
corresponding operon. In a wild-type strain expression of allS takes place mainly
anaerobically and is hyperinduced when the nitrogen source limits growth.
However, expression of allS is independent of regulators of the Ntr response,
NtrC or Nac. Band shift experiments showed that AllR binds to DNA containing the 
allS-allA intergenic region and the gcl(P) promoter and its binding is abolished 
by glyoxylate. Both DNA fragments contain a highly conserved inverted repeat,
which after site-directed mutagenesis, has been proven to be the AllR-binding
site. This site displays similarity with the IclR family recognized consensus.
Interaction of AllR with the single operator present in the allS-allA intergenic 
region prevented binding of RNA polymerase to either of the two divergent
promoters. The regulator AllS interacts only with allD(P) even in the absence of 
allantoin. Analysis of this promoter allowed us to identify an inverted repeat as
a motif for AllS binding. We propose a model for the coordinate control of the
allantoin regulon by AllR and AllS.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-2836(02)01134-8 
PMID: 12460564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 1999 Dec;181(24):7479-84.

Genetic analysis of a chromosomal region containing genes required for
assimilation of allantoin nitrogen and linked glyoxylate metabolism in
Escherichia coli.

Cusa E(1), Obradors N, Baldomà L, Badía J, Aguilar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Growth experiments with Escherichia coli have shown that this organism is able to
use allantoin as a sole nitrogen source but not as a sole carbon source. Nitrogen
assimilation from this compound was possible only under anaerobic conditions, in 
which all the enzyme activities involved in allantoin metabolism were detected.
Of the nine genes encoding proteins required for allantoin degradation, only the 
one encoding glyoxylate carboligase (gcl), the first enzyme of the pathway
leading to glycerate, had been identified and mapped at centisome 12 on the
chromosome map. Phenotypic complementation of mutations in the other two genes of
the glycerate pathway, encoding tartronic semialdehyde reductase (glxR) and
glycerate kinase (glxK), allowed us to clone and map them closely linked to gcl. 
Complete sequencing of a 15.8-kb fragment encompassing these genes defined a
regulon with 12 open reading frames (ORFs). Due to the high similarity of the
products of two of these ORFs with yeast allantoinase and yeast allantoate
amidohydrolase, a systematic analysis of the gene cluster was undertaken to
identify genes involved in allantoin utilization. A BLASTP search predicted four 
of the genes that we sequenced to encode allantoinase (allB), allantoate
amidohydrolase (allC), ureidoglycolate hydrolase (allA), and ureidoglycolate
dehydrogenase (allD). The products of these genes were overexpressed and shown to
have the predicted corresponding enzyme activities. Transcriptional fusions to
lacZ permitted the identification of three functional promoters corresponding to 
three transcriptional units for the structural genes and another promoter for the
regulatory gene allR. Deletion of this regulatory gene led to constitutive
expression of the regulon, indicating a negatively acting function.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.24.7479-7484.1999 
PMCID: PMC94204
PMID: 10601204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((araC) AND (dkgA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Mar;38(3):431-9. doi: 10.1007/s10295-010-0787-5.
Epub 2010 Jul 30.

YqhC regulates transcription of the adjacent Escherichia coli genes yqhD and dkgA
that are involved in furfural tolerance.

Turner PC(1), Miller EN, Jarboe LR, Baggett CL, Shanmugam KT, Ingram LO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Box
110700, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Previous results have demonstrated that the silencing of adjacent genes encoding 
NADPH-dependent furfural oxidoreductases (yqhD dkgA) is responsible for increased
furfural tolerance in an E. coli strain EMFR9 [Miller et al., Appl Environ
Microbiol 75:4315-4323, 2009]. This gene silencing is now reported to result from
the spontaneous insertion of an IS10 into the coding region of yqhC, an upstream 
gene. YqhC shares homology with transcriptional regulators belonging to the
AraC/XylS family and was shown to act as a positive regulator of the adjacent
operon encoding YqhD and DkgA. Regulation was demonstrated by constructing a
chromosomal deletion of yqhC, a firefly luciferase reporter plasmid for yqhC, and
by a direct comparison of furfural resistance and NADPH-dependent furfural
reductase activity. Closely related bacteria contain yqhC, yqhD, and dkgA
orthologs in the same arrangement as in E. coli LY180. Orthologs of yqhC are also
present in more distantly related Gram-negative bacteria. Disruption of yqhC
offers a useful approach to increase furfural tolerance in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-010-0787-5 
PMID: 20676725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((araC) AND (galK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Gene. 1998 Jul 17;215(1):19-27.

The mannitol utilization genes of Pseudomonas fluorescens are regulated by an
activator: cloning, nucleotide sequence and expression of the mtlR gene.

Brünker P(1), Hils M, Altenbuchner J, Mattes R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Industrielle Genetik, Universität Stuttgart, Allmandring 31,
70569, Stuttgart, Germany.

A plasmid with the galK gene under control of the promoter of the mannitol
utilization genes (mtl) from Pseudomonas fluorescens DSM 50106 was constructed to
isolate the mtl regulatory gene. An Escherichia coli galK- mtl- strain with this 
plasmid was used to screen a genomic library of P. fluorescens for the presence
of the regulatory gene by plating on McConkey agar plates supplemented with
galactose and mannitol. Clones carrying the regulatory gene were isolated and by 
complemention assays, deletion analysis and DNA sequencing an open reading frame 
(mtlR) of 906nt identified encoding the regulator. The deduced protein MtlR with 
a calculated molecular mass of 34.7kDa showed a low overall similarity to several
other regulatory proteins of the XylS/AraC family. When mtlR was cloned and
expressed in E. coli, the protein was produced as inclusion bodies. Complete
denaturation followed by subsequent slow refolding led to low amounts of active
protein. The activity was shown in gel mobility shift assays by binding of MtlR
to a DNA fragment containing the promoter/operator region of the P. fluorescens
mtl genes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(98)00274-1 
PMID: 9666063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1992 Nov;174(21):6862-71.

Sequence elements in the Escherichia coli araFGH promoter.

Hendrickson W(1), Flaherty C, Molz L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago 60680.

The Escherichia coli araFGH operon codes for proteins involved in the L-arabinose
high-affinity transport system. Transcriptional regulation of the operon was
studied by creating point mutations and deletions in the control region cloned
into a GalK expression vector. The transcription start site was confirmed by RNA 
sequencing of transcripts. The sequences essential for polymerase function were
localized by deletions and point mutations. Surprisingly, only a weak -10
consensus sequence, and no -35 sequence is required. Mutation of a guanosine at
position -12 greatly reduced promoter activity, which suggests important
polymerase interactions with DNA between the usual -10 and -35 positions. A
double mutation toward the consensus in the -10 region was required to create a
promoter capable of significant AraC-independent transcription. These results
show that the araFGH promoter structure is similar to that of the galP1 promoter 
and is substantially different from that of the araBAD promoter. The effects of
11 mutations within the DNA region thought to bind the cyclic AMP receptor
protein correlate well with the CRP consensus binding sequence and confirm that
this region is responsible for cyclic AMP regulation. Deletion of the AraC
binding site nearest the promoter, araFG1, eliminates arabinose regulation,
whereas deletion of the upstream AraC binding site, araFG2, has only a slight
effect on promoter activity.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.21.6862-6871.1992 
PMCID: PMC207364
PMID: 1400237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((araC) AND (galT)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jul;182(13):3794-801.

Defining a rob regulon in Escherichia coli by using transposon mutagenesis.

Bennik MH(1), Pomposiello PJ, Thorne DF, Demple B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cell Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. m.h.j.bennik@ato.wag-ur.nl

The Rob protein of Escherichia coli is a member of the AraC-XylS family of
prokaryotic transcriptional regulators and is expressed constitutively. Deletion 
of the rob gene increases susceptibility to organic solvents, while
overexpression of Rob increases tolerance to organic solvents and resistance to a
variety of antibiotics and to the superoxide-generating compound phenazine
methosulfate. To determine whether constitutive levels of Rob regulate basal gene
expression, we performed a MudJ transposon screen in a rob deletion mutant
containing a plasmid that allows for controlled rob gene expression. We
identified eight genes and confirmed that seven are transcriptionally activated
by normal expression of Rob from the chromosomal rob gene (inaA, marR, aslB,
ybaO, mdlA, yfhD, and ybiS). One gene, galT, was repressed by Rob. We also
demonstrated by Northern analysis that basal expression of micF is significantly 
higher in wild-type E. coli than in a rob deletion mutant. Rob binding to the
promoter regions of most of these genes was substantiated in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. However, Mu insertions in individual Rob-regulated genes
did not affect solvent sensitivity. This phenotype may depend on changes in the
expression of several of these Rob-regulated genes or on other genes that were
not identified. Rob clearly affects the basal expression of genes with a broad
range of functions, including antibiotic resistance, acid adaptation, carbon
metabolism, cell wall synthesis, central intermediary metabolism, and transport. 
The magnitudes of Rob's effects are modest, however, and the protein may thus
play a role as a general transcription cofactor.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.13.3794-3801.2000 
PMCID: PMC94552
PMID: 10850996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((argR) AND (fic)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2000 Mar;146 ( Pt 3):581-589. doi:
10.1099/00221287-146-3-581.

Stability by multimer resolution of pJHCMW1 is due to the Tn1331 resolvase and
not to the Escherichia coli Xer system.

Tolmasky ME(1)(2), Colloms S(2), Blakely G(2), Sherratt DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Nutrition, Department of Biological
Science, School of Natural Science and Mathematics, California State University
Fullerton, Fullerton, CA 92834-6850, USA2.
(2)Microbiology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK1.

The plasmid pJHCMW1 encodes resistance to several aminoglycosides and
beta-lactams and consists of a copy of the transposon Tn1331, a region including 
the replication functions, and a sequence with homology to ColE1 cer, designated 
mwr. In this work, the role of this cer-like site in ensuring the stable
inheritance of pJHCMW1 by multimer resolution was studied. The Escherichia coli
Xer site-specific recombination system acts at sites such as ColE1 cer to resolve
plasmid multimers formed by homologous recombination, thereby maintaining
plasmids in a monomeric state and helping to ensure stable plasmid inheritance.
Despite its high similarity to ColE1 cer, the pJHCMW1 mwr was a poor substrate
for Xer recombination in E. coli and did not contribute significantly to plasmid 
stability. Instead, the Tn1331 co-integrate resolution system was highly active
at resolving pJHCMW1 multimers and ensured the stable inheritance of pJHCMW1.
Although Xer recombination at pJHCMW1 mwr was inefficient in E. coli, the
recombination that did occur was dependent on ArgR, PepA, XerC and XerD. A
supercoiled circular DNA molecule containing two pJHCMW1 mwr sites in direct
repeat yielded Holliday-junction-containing product when incubated with ArgR,
PepA, XerC and XerD in vitro, confirming that pJHCMW1 mwr is a functional
recombination site. However, unlike cer, some Holliday-junction-containing
product could be detected for mwr in the absence of ArgR, although addition of
this protein resulted in formation of more Holliday junctions. Binding
experiments demonstrated that XerD bound to pJHCMW1 mwr core with a high
affinity, but that XerC bound to this site very poorly, even in the presence of
XerD.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-146-3-581 
PMID: 10746761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((atoC) AND (atoC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nat Microbiol. 2017 Dec;2(12):1624-1634. doi: 10.1038/s41564-017-0028-z. Epub
2017 Sep 25.

A metabolic pathway for catabolizing levulinic acid in bacteria.

Rand JM(1), Pisithkul T(2), Clark RL(1), Thiede JM(1), Mehrer CR(1), Agnew DE(1),
Campbell CE(1), Markley AL(1), Price MN(3), Ray J(3), Wetmore KM(3), Suh Y(3),
Arkin AP(3)(4), Deutschbauer AM(3), Amador-Noguez D(2)(5), Pfleger BF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
(3)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720,
USA.
(5)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
53706, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. pfleger@engr.wisc.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Microbiol. 2017 Dec;2(12):1580-1581.

Microorganisms can catabolize a wide range of organic compounds and therefore
have the potential to perform many industrially relevant bioconversions. One
barrier to realizing the potential of biorefining strategies lies in our
incomplete knowledge of metabolic pathways, including those that can be used to
assimilate naturally abundant or easily generated feedstocks. For instance,
levulinic acid (LA) is a carbon source that is readily obtainable as a
dehydration product of lignocellulosic biomass and can serve as the sole carbon
source for some bacteria. Yet, the genetics and structure of LA catabolism have
remained unknown. Here, we report the identification and characterization of a
seven-gene operon that enables LA catabolism in Pseudomonas putida KT2440. When
the pathway was reconstituted with purified proteins, we observed the formation
of four acyl-CoA intermediates, including a unique 4-phosphovaleryl-CoA and the
previously observed 3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA product. Using adaptive evolution, we
obtained a mutant of Escherichia coli LS5218 with functional deletions of fadE
and atoC that was capable of robust growth on LA when it expressed the five
enzymes from the P. putida operon. This discovery will enable more efficient use 
of biomass hydrolysates and metabolic engineering to develop bioconversions using
LA as a feedstock.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-017-0028-z 
PMCID: PMC5705400
PMID: 28947739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Jun;97(12):5259-74. doi:
10.1007/s00253-013-4843-8. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Regulation of poly-(R)-(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) biosynthesis by
the AtoSCDAEB regulon in phaCAB+ Escherichia coli.

Theodorou EC(1), Theodorou MC, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki GR-54124, Greece. evatheod@physics.auth.gr

AtoSC two-component system (TCS) upregulates the high-molecular weight
poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) biosynthesis in recombinant phaCAB (+)
Escherichia coli strains, with the Cupriavidus necator phaCAB operon. We report
here that AtoSC upregulates also the copolymer P(3HB-co-3HV) biosynthesis in
phaCAB (+) E. coli. Acetoacetate-induced AtoSC maximized P(3HB-co-3HV) to
1.27 g/l with a 3HV fraction of 25.5 % wt. and biopolymer content of 75 % w/w in 
a time-dependent process. The atoSC locus deletion in the ∆atoSC strains resulted
in 4.5-fold P(3HB-co-3HV) reduction, while the 3HV fraction of the copolymer was 
restricted to only 6.4 % wt. The ∆atoSC phenotype was restored by
extrachromosomal introduction of AtoSC. Deletion of the atoDAEB operon triggered 
a significant decrease in P(3HB-co-3HV) synthesis and 3HV content in ∆atoDAEB
strains. However, the acetoacetate-induced AtoSC in those strains increased
P(3HB-co-3HV) to 0.8 g/l with 21 % 3HV, while AtoC or AtoS expression increased
P(3HB-co-3HV) synthesis 3.6- or 2.4-fold, respectively, upon acetoacetate.
Complementation of the ∆atoDAEB phenotype was achieved by the extrachromosomal
introduction of the atoSCDAEB regulon. Individual inhibition of β-oxidation and
mainly fatty acid biosynthesis pathways by acrylic acid or cerulenin,
respectively, reduced P(3HB-co-3HV) biosynthesis. Under those conditions,
introduction of atoSC or atoSCDAEB regulon was capable of upregulating biopolymer
accumulation. Concurrent inhibition of both the fatty acid metabolic pathways
eliminated P(3HB-co-3HV) production. P(3HB-co-3HV) upregulation in phaCAB (+) E. 
coli by AtoSC signaling through atoDAEB operon and its participation in the fatty
acids metabolism interplay provide additional perceptions of AtoSC critical
involvement in E. coli regulatory processes towards biotechnologically improved
polyhydroxyalkanoates biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-4843-8 
PMID: 23546423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2012 Aug 30;47(1):84-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2012.05.004. Epub
2012 May 23.

Calcium channels blockers inhibit the signal transduction through the AtoSC
system in Escherichia coli.

Theodorou MC(1), Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. mtheod80@yahoo.com

Verapamil, diltiazem and nifedipine are Ca(2+)-channel blockers used in
cardiovascular diseases. We report here that the Escherichia coli AtoSC signaling
is inhibited by those blockers. AtoSC two-component system plays a pivotal role
in sophisticated signaling networks in E. coli regulating processes implicated in
bacterial homeostasis and pathogenicity. The Ca(2+)-channel blockers abrogated
the in vitro full-length AtoS kinase autophosphorylation. However, they
demonstrated no effect on the AtoS cytoplasmic form autophosphorylation. AtoC
protected AtoS from verapamil or diltiazem but not from nifedipine, when the two 
constituents formed complex. The blockers did not affect the AtoS≈P to AtoC
phosphotransfer. The blockers-mediated AtoSC inhibition was verified in vivo on
the atoDAEB expression, which was inhibited only in AtoSC-expressing bacteria
upon acetoacetate. The AtoS and AtoC protein or their genes transcription levels 
were unaffected by the blockers. Blockers demonstrated differential effects in
the regulation of both the cytosolic- and most potently the membrane-bound-cPHB. 
Extracellular Ca(2+) counteracted the verapamil-mediated effect on cPHB only in
atoSC(+) cells. Extracellular Ca(2+) reversed the diltiazem-mediated cPHB
decreases in cells of both genetic backgrounds, yet a Ca(2+)-concentration
dependent reversion was observed only in the AtoSC-regulated cPHB. Nifedipine
caused a more pronounced cPHB down-regulation that was not reversed by
extracellular Ca(2+). The AtoSC signaling inhibition by Ca(2+)-channel blockers
used for human treatment, and their differential effects on cPHB-formed
Ca(2+)-channels, signify their implications in bacterial-host interactions
through the two-component signaling and could stimulate the design of
Ca(2+)-channels blockers derivatives acting as inhibitors of two-component
systems.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2012.05.004 
PMID: 22634222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Metab Eng. 2012 Jul;14(4):354-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2012.03.010. Epub 2012 Mar
30.

Involvement of the AtoSCDAEB regulon in the high molecular weight
poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis in phaCAB(+)Escherichia coli.

Theodorou EC(1), Theodorou MC, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki GR-54124, Greece. evatheod@physics.auth.gr

AtoSC two-component system plays a pivotal role in many regulatory indispensable 
Escherichia coli processes. AtoSCDAEB regulon, comprising the AtoSC system and
the atoDAEB operon, regulates the short-chain fatty acids catabolism. We report
here, that AtoSC up-regulates the high-molecular weight PHB biosynthesis, in
recombinant phaCAB(+)E. coli, with the Cupriavidus necator phaCAB operon. PHB
accumulation was maximized upon the acetoacetate-mediated induction of AtoSC,
under glucose 1% w/v, resulting in a yield of 1.73 g/l with a biopolymer content 
of 64.5% w/w. The deletion of the atoSC locus, in the ΔatoSC strains, resulted in
a 5 fold reduction of PHB accumulation, which was restored by the
extrachromosomal introduction of the AtoSC system. The deletion of the atoDAEB
operon triggered a significant decrease in PHB synthesis in ΔatoDAEB strains.
However, the acetoacetate-induced AtoSC system in those strains increased PHB to 
1.55 g/l, while AtoC expression increased PHB to 1.4 g/l upon acetoacetate. The
complementation of the ΔatoDAEB phenotype was achieved by the extrachromosomal
introduction of the atoSCDAEB regulon. The individual inhibition of β-oxidation
and mainly fatty-acid biosynthesis pathways by acrylic acid or cerulenin
respectively, reduced PHB biosynthesis. Under those conditions the introduction
of the atoSC locus or the atoSCDAEB regulon was capable to up-regulate the
biopolymer accumulation. The concurrent inhibition of both the fatty acids
metabolic pathways eliminated PHB production. PHB up-regulation in phaCAB(+)E.
coli, by AtoSC signaling through atoDAEB operon and its participation in the
fatty acids metabolism interplay, provide additional perceptions of AtoSC
critical involvement in E. coli regulatory processes towards the
biotechnologically improved polyhydroxyalkanoates biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2012.03.010 
PMID: 22484344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Amino Acids. 2012 Aug;43(2):833-44. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-1140-7. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Involvement of AtoSC two-component system in Escherichia coli flagellar regulon.

Theodorou MC(1), Theodorou EC, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. mtheod80@yahoo.com

The AtoSC two-component system in Escherichia coli is a key regulator of many
physiological processes. We report here the contribution of AtoSC in E. coli
motility and chemotaxis. AtoSC locus deletion in ΔatoSC cells renders cells not
motile or responsive against any chemoattractant or repellent independently of
the AtoSC inducer's presence. AtoSC expression through plasmid complemented the
ΔatoSC phenotype. Cells expressing either AtoS or AtoC demonstrated analogous
motility and chemotactic phenotypes as ΔatoSC cells, independently of AtoSC
inducer's presence. Mutations of AtoC phosphate-acceptor sites diminished or
abrogated E. coli chemotaxis. trAtoC, the AtoC constitutive active form which
lacks its receiver domain, up-regulated E. coli motility. AtoSC enhanced the
transcription of the flhDC and fliAZY operons and to a lesser extent of the
flgBCDEFGHIJKL operon. The AtoSC-mediated regulation of motility and chemotactic 
response required also the expression of the CheAY system. The AtoSC inducers
enhanced the AtoSC-mediated motility and chemotaxis. Acetoacetate or spermidine
further promoted the responses of only AtoSC-expressing cells, while Ca(2+)
demonstrated its effects independently of AtoSC. Histamine regulated bacterial
chemotaxis only in atoSC (+) cells in a concentration-dependent manner while
reversed the AtoSC-mediated effects when added at high concentrations. The
trAtoC-controlled motility effects were enhanced by acetoacetate or spermidine,
but not by histamine. These data reveal that AtoSC system regulates the motility 
and chemotaxis of E. coli, participating in the transcriptional induction of the 
main promoters of the chemotactic regulon and modifying the motility and
chemotactic phenotypes in an induction-dependent mechanism.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-011-1140-7 
PMID: 22083893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Aug 15;19(16):5061-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.06.029. Epub
2011 Jun 21.

Regulation of the Escherichia coli AtoSC two component system by synthetic
biologically active 5;7;8-trimethyl-1;4-benzoxazine analogues.

Filippou PS(1), Koini EN, Calogeropoulou T, Kalliakmani P, Panagiotidis CA,
Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.

The Escherichia coli AtoSC two component system;upon acetoacetate
induction;regulates the expression of the atoDAEB operon;through His→Asp
phopshotransfer;thus modulating important cellular processes. In this report the 
effect of seven 5,7,8-trimethyl-1,4-benzoxazine derivatives on the regulation of 
the E. coli AtoSC system was studied. The new compounds were tested for their
effectiveness on the expression of the atoC and the regulated atoDAEB operon. The
non-substituted 5,7,8-trimethyl-1,4-benzoxazine (4a), was the most potent inducer
on atoC transcription;resulting in accumulation of AtoC protein. The induction of
atoC by 4a was specific;since no effect was observed on the other genes of the
system (atoS and atoDAEB). Moreover;compound 4a was shown to significantly
up-regulate the in vitro kinase activity of the histidine kinase AtoS without
altering the protein levels in the cell. Interestingly;this compound appeared to 
modulate the acetoacetate-mediated induction of the atoDAEB promoter by the AtoSC
system. These data provide the first evidence for a differential modulator role
of 5,7,8-trimethyl-1,4-benzoxazine;on the AtoSC two component system mediated
signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.06.029 
PMID: 21757361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 13;12(1):238. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-238.

Escherichia coli genome-wide promoter analysis: identification of additional AtoC
binding target elements.

Pilalis E(1), Chatziioannou AA, Grigoroudis AI, Panagiotidis CA, Kolisis FN,
Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research
Foundation, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Studies on bacterial signal transduction systems have revealed
complex networks of functional interactions, where the response regulators play a
pivotal role. The AtoSC system of E. coli activates the expression of atoDAEB
operon genes, and the subsequent catabolism of short-chain fatty acids, upon
acetoacetate induction. Transcriptome and phenotypic analyses suggested that
atoSC is also involved in several other cellular activities, although we have
recently reported a palindromic repeat within the atoDAEB promoter as the single,
cis-regulatory binding site of the AtoC response regulator. In this work, we used
a computational approach to explore the presence of yet unidentified AtoC binding
sites within other parts of the E. coli genome.
RESULTS: Through the implementation of a computational de novo motif detection
workflow, a set of candidate motifs was generated, representing putative AtoC
binding targets within the E. coli genome. In order to assess the biological
relevance of the motifs and to select for experimental validation of those
sequences related robustly with distinct cellular functions, we implemented a
novel approach that applies Gene Ontology Term Analysis to the motif hits and
selected those that were qualified through this procedure. The computational
results were validated using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation assays to assess the
in vivo binding of AtoC to the predicted sites. This process verified twenty-two 
additional AtoC binding sites, located not only within intergenic regions, but
also within gene-encoding sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, by tracing a number of putative AtoC binding sites, has 
indicated an AtoC-related cross-regulatory function. This highlights the
significance of computational genome-wide approaches in elucidating complex
patterns of bacterial cell regulation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-238 
PMCID: PMC3118216
PMID: 21569465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Signal. 2011 Aug;23(8):1327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.03.015. Epub
2011 Apr 3.

Inhibition of the signal transduction through the AtoSC system by histidine
kinase inhibitors in Escherichia coli.

Theodorou EC(1), Theodorou MC, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, GR-54124, Greece. evatheod@physics.auth.gr

AtoSC two-component system participates in many indispensable processes of
Escherichia coli. We report here that the AtoSC signal transduction is inhibited 
by established histidine kinase inhibitors. Closantel, RWJ-49815 and TNP-ATP
belonging to different chemical classes of inhibitors, abrogated the in vitro
AtoS kinase autophosphorylation. However, when AtoS was embedded in the membrane 
fractions, higher inhibitor concentrations were required for total inhibition.
When AtoS interacted with AtoC forming complex, the intrinsic histidine kinase
was protected by the response regulator, requiring increased inhibitors
concentrations for partially AtoS autophosphorylation reduction. The inhibitors
exerted an additional function on AtoSC, blocking the phosphotransfer from AtoS
to AtoC, without however, affecting AtoC~P dephosphorylation. Their in vivo
consequences through the AtoSC inhibition were elucidated on atoDAEB operon
expression, which was inhibited only in AtoSC-expressing bacteria where AtoSC was
induced by acetoacetate or spermidine. The inhibitor effects were extended on the
AtoSC regulatory role on cPHB [complexed poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate]
biosynthesis. cPHB was decreased upon the blockers only in acetoacetate-induced
AtoSC-expressing cells. Increased ATP amounts during bacterial growth reversed
the inhibitory TNP-ATP-mediated effect on cPHB. The alteration of pivotal E. coli
processes as an outcome of AtoSC inhibition, establish this system as a target of
two-component systems inhibitors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.03.015 
PMID: 21443947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 May;1810(5):561-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.01.014. 
Epub 2011 Feb 2.

AtoSC two-component system is involved in cPHB biosynthesis through fatty acid
metabolism in E. coli.

Theodorou EC(1), Theodorou MC, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece.

BACKGROUND: We have shown previously that AtoSC two-component system regulates
the biosynthesis of E. coli cPHB [complexed poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate].
METHODS: The AtoSC involvement on fatty acids metabolism, towards cPHB synthesis,
was studied using cPHB determination, gene expression, and fatty acid metabolic
pathways inhibitors.
RESULTS: Deletion of the atoDAEB operon from the E. coli genome resulted in a
consistent reduction of cPHB accumulation. When in ΔatoDAEB cells, the atoDAEB
operon and the AtoSC system were introduced extrachromosomally, a significant
enhancement of cPHB levels was observed. Moreover, the introduction of a plasmid 
with atoSC genes regulated positively cPHB biosynthesis. A lesser cPHB
enhancement was triggered when plasmids carrying either atoS or atoC were
introduced. The intracellular distribution of cPHB was regulated by AtoSC or AtoC
according to the inducer (acetoacetate or spermidine). Blockage of β-oxidation by
acrylic acid reduced cPHB levels, suggesting the involvement of this pathway in
cPHB synthesis; however, the overproduction of AtoSC or its constituents
separately resulted in cPHB enhancement. Inhibition of fatty acid biosynthesis by
cerulenin resulted to a major cPHB reduction, indicating the contribution of this
pathway in cPHB production. Inhibition of both β-oxidation and fatty acid
biosynthesis reduced dramatically cPHB, suggesting the contribution of both
pathways in cPHB biosynthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Short fatty acid catabolism (atoDAEB operon) and fatty acids
metabolic pathways participate in cPHB synthesis through the involvement of AtoSC
system.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The involvement of the AtoSC system in the fatty acids
metabolic pathways interplay towards cPHB biosynthesis provides additional
perceptions of AtoSC role on E. coli regulatory biochemical processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.01.014 
PMID: 21295116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Mol Graph Model. 2010 Dec;29(4):565-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2010.10.004. Epub
2010 Oct 23.

Dimerization of the AtoC response regulator and modelling of its binding to DNA.

Papadopoulos G(1), Grigoroudis AI, Kyriakidis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, University of Thessaly Ploutonos
26 & Aeolou, Larisa GR-41221, Greece.

Bacterial signal transduction systems can be viewed as an entity of multi-sensory
and output domains, whereas the functions of response regulators play a pivotal
role in the complex network interactions. One crucial property among response
regulators functions is their oligomerization and subsequent binding to DNA. The 
AtoS-AtoC two component system, functionally modulated by various agents,
influences fundamental cellular processes such as short-chain fatty acid
catabolism and poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Among
the already reported characteristic properties, AtoC binds to a specific site, a 
palindromic repeat of 20 nucleotides within the atoDAEB promoter. Since
experimental structures of AtoC or its complex with DNA are not yet available, an
almost complete homology model of AtoC and of its putative entity as a dimer is
constructed for this study, as well as a model of its binding to its target DNA
sequence. The latter is associated with large conformational changes, as shown by
molecular dynamics simulations. Subsequent biochemical study, including
cross-linking via chemical agents, revealed the ability of AtoC to form oligomers
in vitro.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2010.10.004 
PMID: 21115262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((barA) AND (barA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Food Funct. 2019 Mar 20;10(3):1736-1746. doi: 10.1039/c8fo02364f.

Anti-inflammation effects of fucosylated chondroitin sulphate from Acaudina
molpadioides by altering gut microbiota in obese mice.

Hu S (1), Wang J , Xu Y , Yang H , Wang J , Xue C , Yan X , Su L .

Author information: 
(1)Innovation Application Institute, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan,
Zhoushan, 316022, China. hushiweihai@163.com yanxj@zjou.edu.cn.

This study evaluated the possible prebiotic effects of dietary fucosylated
chondroitin sulfate from Acaudina molpadioides (Am-CHS) on the modulation of the 
gut microbiota and the improvement in the risk factors for chronic inflammation
in high fat diet-fed mice. The results showed that the Am-CHS treatment greatly
modified the gut microbiota, including the decrease in Bacteroidetes, increase in
Firmicutes, elevation in Lactobacillus (intestinal barrier protector) and short
chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria (Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and
Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group), and reduction in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
producer (Escherichia coli). This modulation inhibited inflammatory response,
manifesting the decreases in circulating proinflammatory cytokines and their mRNA
expression, and the increases in interleukin-10. Dietary Am-CHS caused reductions
in serum and fecal LPS concentrations and inhibition of transcription of
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and its downstream proteins. In addition, there were 
increases in the portal levels of fecal SCFAs, which probably contributed to an
increase in the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) protein
in Am-CHS-treated mice. These results suggest that modulation of gut microbiota
by Am-CHS can improve chronic inflammation by reducing LPS levels and TLR4
signaling. Modulation also appears to increase the levels of fecal SCFAs, which
activates AMPK and finally leads to inflammation resistance.

DOI: 10.1039/c8fo02364f 
PMID: 30855043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochemistry. 2017 Dec 26;56(51):6639-6651. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00936.
Epub 2017 Dec 14.

The Autophagy-Related Beclin-1 Protein Requires the Coiled-Coil and BARA Domains 
To Form a Homodimer with Submicromolar Affinity.

Ranaghan MJ(1), Durney MA(1), Mesleh MF(1), McCarren PR(1), Garvie CW(1), Daniels
DS(2), Carey KL(1), Skepner AP(1), Levine B(3), Perez JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Development of Therapeutics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
, 415 Main Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Dayton , 300 College Park, Dayton, Ohio
45469, United States.
(3)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center ,
Dallas, Texas 75390, United States.

Beclin-1 (BECN1) is an essential component of macroautophagy. This process is a
highly conserved survival mechanism that recycles damaged cellular components or 
pathogens by encasing them in a bilayer vesicle that fuses with a lysosome to
allow degradation of the vesicular contents. Mutations or altered expression
profiles of BECN1 have been linked to various cancers and neurodegenerative
diseases. Viruses, including HIV and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), are also
known to specifically target BECN1 as a means of evading host defense mechanisms.
Autophagy is regulated by the interaction between BECN1 and Bcl-2, a pro-survival
protein in the apoptotic pathway that stabilizes the BECN1 homodimer. Disruption 
of the homodimer by phosphorylation or competitive binding promotes autophagy
through an unknown mechanism. We report here the first recombinant synthesis (3-5
mg/L in an Escherichia coli culture) and characterization of full-length, human
BECN1. Our analysis reveals that full-length BECN1 exists as a soluble homodimer 
(KD ∼ 0.45 μM) that interacts with Bcl-2 (KD = 4.3 ± 1.2 μM) and binds to lipid
membranes. Dimerization is proposed to be mediated by a coiled-coil region of
BECN1. A construct lacking the C-terminal BARA domain but including the
coiled-coil region exhibits a homodimer KD 3.5-fold weaker than that of
full-length BECN1, indicating that both the BARA domain and the coiled-coil
region of BECN1 contribute to dimer formation. Using site-directed mutagenesis,
we show that residues at the C-terminus of the coiled-coil region previously
shown to interact with the BARA domain play a key role in dimerization and
mutations weaken the interface by ∼5-fold.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00936 
PMCID: PMC5842915
PMID: 29185708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Front Microbiol. 2017 Jun 14;8:1092. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01092. eCollection
2017.

Antimicrobial Potential of Bacteria Associated with Marine Sea Slugs from North
Sulawesi, Indonesia.

Böhringer N(1)(2), Fisch KM(1)(2), Schillo D(3), Bara R(4), Hertzer C(1), Grein
F(5)(6), Eisenbarth JH(3), Kaligis F(4), Schneider T(5)(6), Wägele H(3), König
GM(1)(6), Schäberle TF(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pharmaceutical Biology, University of BonnBonn, Germany.
(2)Institute for Insect Biotechnology, Justus Liebig University of
GiessenGiessen, Germany.
(3)Centre of Molecular Biodiversity, Zoological Research Museum Alexander
KoenigBonn, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Fisheries and Marine Science, Sam Ratulangi UniversityManado,
Indonesia.
(5)German Center for Infection Research Partner Site Bonn-CologneBonn, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology -
Pharmaceutical Microbiology Section, University of BonnBonn, Germany.

Nudibranchia, marine soft-bodied organisms, developed, due to the absence of a
protective shell, different strategies to protect themselves against putative
predators and fouling organisms. One strategy is to use chemical weapons to
distract predators, as well as pathogenic microorganisms. Hence, these gastropods
take advantage of the incorporation of chemical molecules. Thereby the original
source of these natural products varies; it might be the food source, de novo
synthesis from the sea slug, or biosynthesis by associated bacteria. These
bioactive molecules applied by the slugs can become important drug leads for
future medicinal drugs. To test the potential of the associated bacteria, the
latter were isolated from their hosts, brought into culture and extracts were
prepared and tested for antimicrobial activities. From 49 isolated bacterial
strains 35 showed antibiotic activity. The most promising extracts were chosen
for further testing against relevant pathogens. In that way three strains showing
activity against methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus and one strain with 
activity against enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli, respectively, were
identified. The obtained results indicate that the sea slug associated microbiome
is a promising source for bacterial strains, which hold the potential for the
biotechnological production of antibiotics.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01092 
PMCID: PMC5469899
PMID: 28659904 


4. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2016 Oct;35(5):267-271.

Application of Monoclonal Antibodies to Detect and Compare the Levels of
Streptococcus mutans in Adolescents Undergoing Orthodontic Treatment with Those
Not Undergoing Treatment.

Kim JH(1), Kim MA(2), Kim JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Chonnam National
University , Gwangju, Korea.
(2)2 Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Institute of Oral Bioscience, School
of Dentistry, Chonbuk National University , Jeonju-si, Korea.

The purpose of this study was to detect Streptococcus mutans by using monoclonal 
antibodies (mAbs) against S. mutans that cause dental caries and compare the
levels of the bacterium between the saliva of adolescents undergoing orthodontic 
treatment (OT) and those not undergoing treatment (NT). Saliva samples, collected
from 25 OT adolescents (with a mean age of 12.84 years) and 25 NT adolescents
(mean age of 12.4 years), were analyzed by Dentocult-SM and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay using mAbs against Ag I/II (ckAg I/II) and GTF B (ckGTF B),
GTF C (ckGTF C), and GTF D (ckGTF D) of S. mutans. The DMFT index was slightly
higher in the OT group (5.12 in OT and 4.96 in NT) and the level of S. mutans
(≥105 CFU/mL) was higher in OT (72%) than in NT (56%). The detected levels of
ckAg I/II, ckGTF B, ckGTF C, and ckGTF D were slightly higher in OT than in NT.
The results of this study indicate that use of mAbs against S. mutans yields
sensitive detection for the bacterium in saliva samples and shows that it has a
reliable connection to the number of S. mutans and decayed, missing, filled teeth
(DMFT), suggesting that the levels of S. mutans in saliva can be defined and
compared by the application of the mAbs.

DOI: 10.1089/mab.2016.0028 
PMID: 27788028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 1;11(2):e0148294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148294.
eCollection 2016.

Validation of Cis and Trans Modes in Multistep Phosphotransfer Signaling of
Bacterial Tripartite Sensor Kinases by Using Phos-Tag SDS-PAGE.

Kinoshita-Kikuta E(1), Kinoshita E(1), Eguchi Y(2), Koike T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Molecular Science, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Science and Technology on Food Safety, Faculty of
Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa, Japan.

Tripartite sensor kinases (TSKs) have three phosphorylation sites on His, Asp,
and His residues, which are conserved in a histidine kinase (HK) domain, a
receiver domain, and a histidine-containing phosphotransmitter (HPt) domain,
respectively. By means of a three-step phosphorelay, TSKs convey a phosphoryl
group from the γ-phosphate group of ATP to the first His residue in the HK
domain, then to the Asp residue in the receiver domain, and finally to the second
His residue in the HPt domain. Although TSKs generally form homodimers, it was
unknown whether the mode of phosphorylation in each step was intramolecular (cis)
or intermolecular (trans). To examine this mode, we performed in vitro
complementation analyses using Ala-substituted mutants of the ATP-binding region 
and three phosphorylation sites of recombinant ArcB, EvgS, and BarA TSKs derived 
from Escherichia coli. Phosphorylation profiles of these kinases, determined by
using Phos-tag SDS-PAGE, showed that the sequential modes of the three-step
phosphoryl-transfer reactions of ArcB, EvgS, and BarA are all different:
cis-trans-trans, cis-cis-cis, and trans-trans-trans, respectively. The inclusion 
of a trans mode is consistent with the need to form a homodimer; the fact that
all the steps for EvgS have cis modes is particularly interesting. Phos-tag
SDS-PAGE therefore provides a simple method for identifying the unique and
specific phosphotransfer mode for a given kinase, without taking complicated
intracellular elements into consideration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148294 
PMCID: PMC4734776
PMID: 26828204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mymensingh Med J. 2015 Oct;24(4):800-5.

Isolation and Characterization of Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) in
Paediatric Diarrhoeal Patients by Detection of bfpA gene by PCR and HeLa cell
Adherence Assay.

Saha S(1), Jhora ST, Talukder KA, Azmi IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Shimu Saha, Assistant Professor, Department of Microbiology, Dhaka
Community Medical College, Bara Maghbazar, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

This study has been undertaken to investigate the isolation and identification of
EPEC strains from paediatric diarrhoeal patients. The study was carried out in
the department of Microbiology, Sir Salimullah Medical College & Mitford
Hospital, Bangladesh during January to December, 2011. Total 272 samples were
studied. Samples from patients with diarrhoea were collected from two tertiary
care hospital. At first Esch. coli were isolated from these specimens using
standard microbiological techniques and then EPEC strains were identified on the 
basis of presence of bundle forming pilus (bfpA) gene. Virulence of EPEC strains 
were determined by detection of bfpA gene and observing localized adherence (LA) 
in HeLa cell adherence assay. Esch. coli was isolated and identified from all the
272 samples from patients using standard microbiological techniques. Among 272
samples 20(7.35%) isolates were identified as EPEC on the basis of presence of
bfpA gene detected by polymerase chain reaction. EPEC strains were identified
from those 240 samples, from which Esch. coli had been isolated only. Out of
twenty EPEC strains, 17 strains (85%) showed a pattern of localized adherence in 
Hela cell adherence assay. EPEC strains can be identified by bfpA gene detection 
and by adherence assays. HeLa cell adherence assay is the most specific method
for detection of EPEC strains which has bfpA gene, responsible for localized
adherence (LA) in HeLa cell line. Rapid and reliable detection of EPEC is
required for successful microbiological surveillance and for treatment of EPEC
mediated diarrhoeal disease.


PMID: 26620023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2015 Oct;197(20):3294-306. doi: 10.1128/JB.00436-15. Epub 2015 Aug
10.

Cross Talk Inhibition Nullified by a Receiver Domain Missense Substitution.

Huynh TN(1), Lin HY(1), Noriega CE(2), Lin AV(3), Stewart V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Food Science Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(3)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, California, USA vjstewart@ucdavis.edu.

In two-component signal transduction, a sensor protein transmitter module
controls cognate receiver domain phosphorylation. Most receiver domain sequences 
contain a small residue (Gly or Ala) at position T + 1 just distal to the
essential Thr or Ser residue that forms part of the active site. However, some
members of the NarL receiver subfamily have a large hydrophobic residue at
position T + 1. Our laboratory previously isolated a NarL mutant in which the T +
1 residue Val-88 was replaced with an orthodox small Ala. This NarL V88A mutant
confers a striking phenotype in which high-level target operon expression is both
signal (nitrate) and sensor (NarX and NarQ) independent. This suggests that the
NarL V88A protein is phosphorylated by cross talk from noncognate sources.
Although cross talk was enhanced in ackA null strains that accumulate acetyl
phosphate, it persisted in pta ackA double null strains that cannot synthesize
this compound and was observed also in narL(+) strains. This indicates that
acetate metabolism has complex roles in mediating NarL cross talk. Contrariwise, 
cross talk was sharply diminished in an arcB barA double null strain, suggesting 
that the encoded sensors contribute substantially to NarL V88A cross talk.
Separately, the V88A substitution altered the in vitro rates of NarL
autodephosphorylation and transmitter-stimulated dephosphorylation and decreased 
affinity for the cognate sensor, NarX. Together, these experiments show that the 
residue at position T + 1 can strongly influence two distinct aspects of receiver
domain function, the autodephosphorylation rate and cross talk
inhibition.IMPORTANCE: Many bacterial species contain a dozen or more discrete
sensor-response regulator two-component systems that convert a specific input
into a distinct output pattern. Cross talk, the unwanted transfer of signals
between circuits, occurs when a response regulator is phosphorylated
inappropriately from a noncognate source. Cross talk is inhibited in part by the 
high interaction specificity between cognate sensor-response regulator pairs.
This study shows that a relatively subtle missense change from Val to Ala
nullifies cross talk inhibition, enabling at least two noncognate sensors to
enforce an inappropriate output independently of the relevant input.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00436-15 
PMCID: PMC4573717
PMID: 26260457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0132598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132598.
eCollection 2015.

Functional Characterization of the Receiver Domain for Phosphorelay Control in
Hybrid Sensor Kinases.

Kinoshita-Kikuta E(1), Kinoshita E(1), Eguchi Y(2), Yanagihara S(1), Edahiro
K(1), Inoue Y(1), Taniguchi M(1), Yoshida M(3), Yamamoto K(3), Takahashi H(4),
Sawasaki T(4), Utsumi R(5), Koike T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Molecular Science, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Science and Technology on Food Safety, Faculty of
Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.
(4)Division of Cell-Free Sciences, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Japan.
(5)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kinki University,
Nara Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e0136022.

Hybrid sensor kinase, which contains a histidine kinase (HK) domain, a receiver
domain, and a histidine-containing phosphotransmitter (HPt) domain, conveys
signals to its cognate response regulator by means of a His-Asp-His-Asp
phosphorelay. We examined the multistep phosphorelay of a recombinant EvgAS
system in Escherichia coli and performed in vitro quantitative analyses of
phosphorylation by using Phos-tag SDS-PAGE. Replacement of Asp in the receiver
domain of EvgS by Ala markedly promoted phosphorylation at His in the HK domain
compared with that in wild-type EvgS. Similar Ala-substituted mutants of other
hybrid sensor kinases BarA and ArcB showed similar characteristics. In the
presence of sufficient ATP, autophosphorylation of the HK domain in the mutant
progressed efficiently with nearly pseudo-first-order kinetics until the
phosphorylation ratio reached a plateau value of more than 95% within 60 min, and
the value was maintained until 180 min. However, both wild-type EvgS and the
Ala-substituted mutant of His in the HPt domain showed a phosphorylation ratio of
less than 25%, which gradually decreased after 10 min. These results showed that 
the phosphorylation level is regulated negatively by the receiver domain.
Furthermore, our in vivo assays confirmed the existence of a similar
hyperphosphorylation reaction in the HK domain of the EvgS mutant in which the
Asp residue was replaced with Ala, confirming the validity of the control
mechanism proposed from profiling of phosphorylation in vitro [corrected].

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132598 
PMCID: PMC4494823
PMID: 26151934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((barA) AND (uvrY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2015 Mar;197(5):983-91. doi: 10.1128/JB.02325-14. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Effects of the global regulator CsrA on the BarA/UvrY two-component signaling
system.

Camacho MI(1), Alvarez AF(1), Chavez RG(1), Romeo T(2), Merino E(3), Georgellis
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The hybrid sensor kinase BarA and its cognate response regulator UvrY, members of
the two-component signal transduction family, activate transcription of CsrB and 
CsrC noncoding RNAs. These two small RNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding
protein CsrA, which posttranscriptionally regulates translation and/or stability 
of its target mRNAs. Here, we provide evidence that CsrA positively affects,
although indirectly, uvrY expression, at both the transcriptional and
translational levels. We also demonstrate that CsrA is required for properly
switching BarA from its phosphatase to its kinase activity. Thus, the existence
of a feedback loop mechanism that involves the Csr and BarA/UvrY global
regulatory systems is exposed.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02325-14 
PMCID: PMC4325108
PMID: 25535275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Jun;92(5):945-58. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12606. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Global effects of the DEAD-box RNA helicase DeaD (CsdA) on gene expression over a
broad range of temperatures.

Vakulskas CA(1), Pannuri A, Cortés-Selva D, Zere TR, Ahmer BM, Babitzke P, Romeo 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.

In Escherichia coli, activity of the global regulatory RNA binding protein CsrA
is antagonized by two non-coding sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester it away
from its lower affinity mRNA targets. Transcription of csrB/C requires the
BarA-UvrY two component signal transduction system, which responds to short chain
carboxylates. We show that two DEAD-box RNA helicases, DeaD and SrmB, activate
csrB/C expression by different pathways. DeaD facilitates uvrY translation by
counteracting the inhibitory effect of long distance base-pairing between the
uvrY mRNA leader and coding region, while SrmB does not affect UvrY or
UvrY-phosphate levels. Contrary to the prevailing notion that these helicases act
primarily at low temperatures, DeaD and SrmB activated csrB expression over a
wide temperature range. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by
cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) revealed in vivo interactions of
DeaD with 39 mRNAs, including those of uvrY and 9 other regulatory genes. Studies
on the expression of several of the identified genes revealed regulatory effects 
of DeaD in all cases and diverse temperature response patterns. Our findings
uncover an expanded regulatory role for DeaD, which is mediated through novel
mRNA targets, important global regulators and under physiological conditions that
were considered to be incompatible with its function.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12606 
PMCID: PMC4048959
PMID: 24708042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

BarA-UvrY two-component system regulates virulence of uropathogenic E. coli
CFT073.

Palaniyandi S(1), Mitra A, Herren CD, Lockatell CV, Johnson DE, Zhu X,
Mukhopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), a member of extraintestinal pathogenic E. 
coli, cause ∼80% of community-acquired urinary tract infections (UTI) in humans. 
UPEC initiates its colonization in epithelial cells lining the urinary tract with
a complicated life cycle, replicating and persisting in intracellular and
extracellular niches. Consequently, UPEC causes cystitis and more severe form of 
pyelonephritis. To further understand the virulence characteristics of UPEC, we
investigated the roles of BarA-UvrY two-component system (TCS) in regulating UPEC
virulence. Our results showed that mutation of BarA-UvrY TCS significantly
decreased the virulence of UPEC CFT073, as assessed by mouse urinary tract
infection, chicken embryo killing assay, and cytotoxicity assay on human kidney
and uroepithelial cell lines. Furthermore, mutation of either barA or uvrY gene
reduced the production of hemolysin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proinflammatory
cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) and chemokine (IL-8). The virulence phenotype was
restored similar to that of wild-type by complementation of either barA or uvrY
gene in trans. In addition, we discussed a possible link between the BarA-UvrY
TCS and CsrA in positively and negatively controlling virulence in UPEC. Overall,
this study provides the evidences for BarA-UvrY TCS regulates the virulence of
UPEC CFT073 and may point to mechanisms by which virulence regulations are
observed in different ways may control the long-term survival of UPEC in the
urinary tract.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348 
PMCID: PMC3283629
PMID: 22363626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023440. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Analysis of the BarA/UvrY two-component system in Shewanella oneidensis MR-1.

Binnenkade L(1), Lassak J, Thormann KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecophysiology, Max-Planck-Institut für Terrestrische
Mikrobiologie, Marburg, Germany.

The BarA/UvrY two-component system is well conserved in species of the
γ-proteobacteria and regulates numerous processes predominantly by controlling
the expression of a subset of noncoding small RNAs. In this study, we identified 
and characterized the BarA/UvrY two-component system in the gammaproteobacterium 
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. Functional interaction of sensor kinase BarA and the 
cognate response regulator UvrY was indicated by in vitro phosphotransfer
studies. The expression of two predicted small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs), CsrB1 and
CsrB2, was dependent on UvrY. Transcriptomic analysis by microarrays revealed
that UvrY is a global regulator and directly or indirectly affects transcript
levels of more than 200 genes in S. oneidensis. Among these are genes encoding
key enzymes of central carbon metabolism such as ackA, aceAB, and pflAB. As
predicted of a signal transduction pathway that controls aspects of central
metabolism, mutants lacking UvrY reach a significantly higher OD than the wild
type during aerobic growth on N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) while under anaerobic
conditions the mutant grew more slowly. A shorter lag phase occurred with lactate
as carbon source. In contrast, significant growth phenotypes were absent in
complex medium. Based on these studies we hypothesize that, in S. oneidensis
MR-1, the global BarA/UvrY/Csr regulatory pathway is involved in central carbon
metabolism processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023440 
PMCID: PMC3171408
PMID: 21931597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Sep;67(17):2897-908. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z. Epub
2010 May 6.

Post-transcriptional global regulation by CsrA in bacteria.

Timmermans J(1), Van Melderen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie Bactérienne, Institut de Biologie et
de Médecine Moléculaires, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 12
rue des Professeurs Jeener et Brachet, 6041, Gosselies, Belgium.

Global regulation allows bacteria to rapidly modulate the expression of a large
variety of unrelated genes in response to environmental changes. Global
regulators act at different levels of gene expression. This review focuses on
CsrA, a post-transcriptional regulator that affects translation of its gene
targets by binding mRNAs. CsrA controls a large variety of physiological
processes such as central carbon metabolism, motility and biofilm formation. The 
activity of CsrA is itself tightly regulated by the CsrB and CsrC small RNAs and 
the BarA-UvrY two-component system.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z 
PMID: 20446015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2010 Apr;192(7):2009-12. doi: 10.1128/JB.01685-09. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

The physiological stimulus for the BarA sensor kinase.

Chavez RG(1), Alvarez AF, Romeo T, Georgellis D.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

The two-component signal transduction system (TCS) BarA/UvrY activates
transcription of CsrB and CsrC noncoding RNAs, which act by sequestering the
RNA-binding global regulatory protein CsrA. Here, we show that the metabolic end 
products formate and acetate provide a physiological stimulus for this TCS and
thus link posttranscriptional regulation by the Csr system to the metabolic state
of the cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01685-09 
PMCID: PMC2838055
PMID: 20118252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2008;631:40-53. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-78885-2_4.

The two-component network and the general stress sigma factor RpoS (sigma S) in
Escherichia coli.

Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, FB Biologie, Chemie und Pharmazie, Freie,
Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise-str.12-16, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
rhenggea@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The general stress sigma factor RpoS (sigma s) is induced during entry into
stationary phase and in response to multiple stress conditions. RpoS is regulated
at the levels of transcription, translation, proteolysis and protein activity. A 
key factor in RpoS control is the two-component response regulator RssB, which
acts as a direct recognition and targeting factor for ClpXP-mediated RpoS
proteolysis. A major, but not the only phosphodonor for RssB is the complex
histidine sensor kinase ArcB. ArcB coordinates RpoS proteolysis with rpoS
transcription by also phosphorylating the response regulator ArcA, which besides 
controlling a large regulon, also acts as a transcriptional repressor for rpoS.
ArcB activity depends on the redox state of the respiratory chain, which links
RpoS control to the balance between energy supply and available respiratory
electron acceptor. In addition, the BarA/UvrY and Rcs phosphorelay systems can
activate rpoS transcription and translation, respectively. These systems are
involved in the control of motility, biofilm formation and/or virulence,
suggesting that further studying a potential role of RpoS in these physiological 
functions may be rewarding.

DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-78885-2_4 
PMID: 18792681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2006 Nov;264(2):232-7.

Identification of YhdA as a regulator of the Escherichia coli carbon storage
regulation system.

Jonas K(1), Tomenius H, Römling U, Georgellis D, Melefors O.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control, Solna, Sweden.

The Escherichia coli BarA-UvrY two-component system, which controls adaptation
via the CsrB and CsrC sRNAs, is induced at the entry of the stationary phase by
an unknown stimulus. Using a csrB-lacZ fusion, we demonstrated that the factors
RelA, SpoT and LuxS, previously suggested to act on orthologues of this system,
have no role in BarA-UvrY induction. However, using a transposon screen, we
identified the hypothetical protein YhdA as a new regulator of CsrB and CsrC
expression. The YhdA protein is predicted to be membrane-bound and to harbor
GGDEF and EAL domains, which, however, are highly divergent from the consensus
motifs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00457.x 
PMID: 17064377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((bglG) AND (bglB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Jan;314(2):147-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

Characterization of a new β-glucosidase/β-xylosidase from the gut microbiota of
the termite (Reticulitermes santonensis).

Mattéotti C(1), Haubruge E, Thonart P, Francis F, De Pauw E, Portetelle D,
Vandenbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Animale et Microbienne, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Université
de Liège, Gembloux, Belgium. christel.matteotti@ulg.ac.be

The gut of the termite Reticulitermes santonensis contains an interesting
diversity of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms not found elsewhere. These
microorganisms produce many enzyme-digesting lignocellulosic compounds, probably 
in cooperation with endogenous enzymes. Regarding cellulose and hemicellulose
digestion in the termite gut, much remains to be learned about the relative
contributions of termite enzymes and enzymes produced by different
microorganisms. Here we grew bacterial colonies from termite gut suspensions,
identifying 11 of them after PCR amplification of their 16S rRNA genes. After
constructing in Escherichia coli a genomic DNA library corresponding to all of
the colonies obtained, we performed functional screening for α-amylase, xylanase,
β-glucosidase, and endoglucanase activities. This screen revealed a clone
producing β-glucosidase activity. Sequence analysis showed that the cloned
genomic DNA fragment contained three complete ORFs (bglG, bglF, and bglB)
organized in a putative bgl operon. The new β-glucosidase (BglB), identified with
its regulators BglG and BglF, belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 1. The new
β-glucosidase was expressed in E. coli and purified by affinity chromatography.
The purified enzyme shows maximal activity at pH 6.0 and 40 °C. It also displays 
β-xylosidase activity.

FEMS Microbiology Letters © 2010 Federation of European Microbiological
Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original Belgian
government works.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x 
PMID: 21114521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Jun 27;223(2):267-74.

The beta-glucoside genes of Klebsiella aerogenes: conservation and divergence in 
relation to the cryptic bgl genes of Escherichia coli.

Raghunand TR(1), Mahadevan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

The ability to metabolize aromatic beta-glucosides such as salicin and arbutin
varies among members of the Enterobacteriaceae. The ability of Escherichia coli
to degrade salicin and arbutin appears to be cryptic, subject to activation of
the bgl genes, whereas many members of the Klebsiella genus can metabolize these 
sugars. We have examined the genetic basis for beta-glucoside utilization in
Klebsiella aerogenes. The Klebsiella equivalents of bglG, bglB and bglR have been
cloned using the genome sequence database of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Nucleotide
sequencing shows that the K. aerogenes bgl genes show substantial similarities to
the E. coli counterparts. The K. aerogenes bgl genes in multiple copies can also 
complement E. coli mutants deficient in bglG encoding the antiterminator and bglB
encoding the phospho-beta-glucosidase, suggesting that they are functional
homologues. The regulatory region bglR of K. aerogenes shows a high degree of
similarity of the sequences involved in BglG-mediated regulation. Interestingly, 
the regions corresponding to the negative elements present in the E. coli
regulatory region show substantial divergence in K. aerogenes. The possible
evolutionary implications of the results are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00393-8 
PMID: 12829297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2001 May 30;199(2):241-6.

Phenotypic variability of beta-glucoside utilization and its correlation to
pathogenesis process in a few enteric bacteria.

Kharat AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. aru@teacher.com

Utilization of beta-glucosides is markedly variable in the members of the family 
Enterobacteriaceae. The results presented here provide molecular clues for
evolutionary events that resulted in the phenotypic variability seen amongst the 
members of these species. The genomic hybridization of selected
Enterobacteriaceae members with the Escherichia coli bgl and cel genes resulted
in detection of a complete homolog of the bgl and cel operons in Shigella sonnei,
a member that is evolutionarily closest to E. coli. However, the Salmonella group
of organisms have been shown to carry only a homolog of bglR and bglG regions and
the deletions of the bglF and bglB genes. Similarly, Proteus mirabilis,
Enterobacter aerogenes and a non-enteric Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa have been shown to carry a homolog of the bglR and bglG regions and
deletions of the bglF and bglB genes. The homolog of the cel operon could be
identified in S. sonnei and Salmonella groups of organisms. Possible implications
of these observations, in connection with the phenotypic variability seen in
beta-glucoside utilization amongst these members, are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2001.tb10681.x 
PMID: 11377874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiology (Reading). 2000 Aug;146 ( Pt 8):2039-2049. doi:
10.1099/00221287-146-8-2039.

Analysis of the beta-glucoside utilization (bgl) genes of Shigella sonnei:
evolutionary implications for their maintenance in a cryptic state.

Kharat AS(1), Mahadevan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India1.

The pattern of expression of the genes involved in the utilization of aryl
beta-glucosides such as arbutin and salicin is different in the genus Shigella
compared to Escherichia coli. The results presented here indicate that the
homologue of the cryptic bgl operon of E. coli is conserved in Shigella sonnei
and is the primary system involved in beta-glucoside utilization in the organism.
The organization of the bgl genes in S. sonnei is similar to that of E. coli;
however there are three major differences in terms of their pattern of
expression. (i) The bglB gene, encoding phospho-beta-glucosidase B, is
insertionally inactivated in S. sonnei. As a result, mutational activation of the
silent bgl promoter confers an Arbutin-positive (Arb(+)) phenotype to the cells
in a single step; however, acquiring a Salicin-positive (Sal(+)) phenotype
requires the reversion or suppression of the bglB mutation in addition. (ii)
Unlike in E. coli, a majority of the activating mutations (conferring the Arb(+) 
phenotype) map within the unlinked hns locus, whereas activation of the E. coli
bgl operon under the same conditions is predominantly due to insertions within
the bglR locus. (iii) Although the bgl promoter is silent in the wild-type strain
of S. sonnei (as in the case of E. coli), transcriptional and functional analyses
indicated a higher basal level of transcription of the downstream genes. This was
correlated with a 1 bp deletion within the putative Rho-independent terminator
present in the leader sequence preceding the homologue of the bglG gene. The
possible evolutionary implications of these differences for the maintenance of
the genes in the cryptic state are discussed.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-146-8-2039 
PMID: 10931908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((bglG) AND (bglF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Jan;314(2):147-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

Characterization of a new β-glucosidase/β-xylosidase from the gut microbiota of
the termite (Reticulitermes santonensis).

Mattéotti C(1), Haubruge E, Thonart P, Francis F, De Pauw E, Portetelle D,
Vandenbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Animale et Microbienne, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Université
de Liège, Gembloux, Belgium. christel.matteotti@ulg.ac.be

The gut of the termite Reticulitermes santonensis contains an interesting
diversity of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms not found elsewhere. These
microorganisms produce many enzyme-digesting lignocellulosic compounds, probably 
in cooperation with endogenous enzymes. Regarding cellulose and hemicellulose
digestion in the termite gut, much remains to be learned about the relative
contributions of termite enzymes and enzymes produced by different
microorganisms. Here we grew bacterial colonies from termite gut suspensions,
identifying 11 of them after PCR amplification of their 16S rRNA genes. After
constructing in Escherichia coli a genomic DNA library corresponding to all of
the colonies obtained, we performed functional screening for α-amylase, xylanase,
β-glucosidase, and endoglucanase activities. This screen revealed a clone
producing β-glucosidase activity. Sequence analysis showed that the cloned
genomic DNA fragment contained three complete ORFs (bglG, bglF, and bglB)
organized in a putative bgl operon. The new β-glucosidase (BglB), identified with
its regulators BglG and BglF, belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 1. The new
β-glucosidase was expressed in E. coli and purified by affinity chromatography.
The purified enzyme shows maximal activity at pH 6.0 and 40 °C. It also displays 
β-xylosidase activity.

FEMS Microbiology Letters © 2010 Federation of European Microbiological
Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original Belgian
government works.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x 
PMID: 21114521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. EMBO J. 2010 Nov 3;29(21):3630-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.240. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Spatial and temporal organization of the E. coli PTS components.

Lopian L(1), Elisha Y, Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew
University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.

The phosphotransferase system (PTS) controls preferential use of sugars in
bacteria. It comprises of two general proteins, enzyme I (EI) and HPr, and
various sugar-specific permeases. Using fluorescence microscopy, we show here
that EI and HPr localize near the Escherichia coli cell poles. Polar localization
of each protein occurs independently, but HPr is released from the poles in an
EI- and sugar-dependent manner. Conversely, the β-glucoside-specific permease,
BglF, localizes to the cell membrane. EI, HPr and BglF control the β-glucoside
utilization (bgl) operon by modulating the activity of the BglG transcription
factor; BglF inactivates BglG by membrane sequestration and phosphorylation,
whereas EI and HPr activate it by an unknown mechanism in response to
β-glucosides availability. Using biochemical, genetic and imaging methodologies, 
we show that EI and HPr interact with BglG and affect its subcellular
localization in a phosphorylation-independent manner. Upon sugar stimulation,
BglG migrates from the cell periphery to the cytoplasm through the poles. Hence, 
the PTS components appear to control bgl operon expression by ushering BglG
between the cellular compartments. Our results reinforce the notion that signal
transduction in bacteria involves dynamic localization of proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.240 
PMCID: PMC2982763
PMID: 20924357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13523-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902559106. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Modulation of transcription antitermination in the bgl operon of Escherichia coli
by the PTS.

Raveh H(1), Lopian L, Nussbaum-Shochat A, Wright A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, PO Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

BglG, which regulates expression of the beta-glucoside utilization (bgl) operon
in Escherichia coli, represents a family of RNA-binding transcriptional
antiterminators that positively regulate transcription of sugar utilization genes
in Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms. BglG is negatively regulated by the
beta-glucoside phosphotransferase, BglF, by means of phosphorylation and physical
association, and it is positively regulated by the general phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphotransferase system (PTS) proteins, enzyme I (EI) and HPr. We studied the
positive regulation of BglG both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we show that
although EI and HPr are essential for BglG activity, this mode of activation does
not require phosphorylation of BglG by HPr, as opposed to the
phosphorylation-mediated activation of many BglG-like antiterminators in
Gram-positive organisms. The effect of EI and HPr on BglG is not mediated by
BglF. Nevertheless, the release of BglG from BglF, which is stimulated by the
extracellular sugar in a sugar uptake-independent manner, is a prerequisite for
BglG activation. Taken together, the results indicate that activation of BglG is 
a 2-stage process: a sugar-stimulated release from the membrane-bound sugar
sensor followed by a phosphorylation-independent stimulatory effect exerted by
the general PTS proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0902559106 
PMCID: PMC2726385
PMID: 19633194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2007 Dec;189(23):8601-15. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Genetic dissection of the divergent activities of the multifunctional membrane
sensor BglF.

Monderer-Rothkoff G(1), Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University Medical School, P.O.
Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

BglF catalyzes beta-glucoside phosphotransfer across the cytoplasmic membrane in 
Escherichia coli. In addition, BglF acts as a sugar sensor that controls
expression of beta-glucoside utilization genes by reversibly phosphorylating the 
transcriptional antiterminator BglG. Thus, BglF can exist in two opposed states: 
a nonstimulated state that inactivates BglG by phosphorylation and a
sugar-stimulated state that activates BglG by dephosphorylation and
phosphorylates the incoming sugar. Sugar phosphorylation and BglG
(de)phosphorylation are both catalyzed by the same residue, Cys24. To investigate
the coordination and the structural requirements of the opposing activities of
BglF, we conducted a genetic screen that led to the isolation of mutations that
shift the balance toward BglG phosphorylation. We show that some of the mutants
that are impaired in dephosphorylation of BglG retained the ability to catalyze
the concurrent activity of sugar phosphotransfer. These mutations map to two
regions in the BglF membrane domain that, based on their predicted topology, were
suggested to be implicated in activity. Using in vivo cross-linking, we show that
a glycine in the membrane domain, whose substitution impaired the ability of BglF
to dephosphorylate BglG, is spatially close to the active-site cysteine located
in a hydrophilic domain. This residue is part of a newly identified motif
conserved among beta-glucoside permeases associated with RNA-binding
transcriptional antiterminators. The phenotype of the BglF mutants could be
suppressed by BglG mutants that were isolated by a second genetic screen. In
summary, we identified distinct sites in BglF that are involved in regulating
phosphate flow via the common active-site residue in response to environmental
cues.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01220-07 
PMCID: PMC2168942
PMID: 17905978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2005 Apr;8(2):127-34.

The bgl sensory system: a transmembrane signaling pathway controlling
transcriptional antitermination.

Amster-Choder O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P.O.Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. amster@cc.huji.ac.il

The bgl system represents a family of sensory systems composed of membrane-bound 
sugar-sensors and transcriptional antiterminators, which regulate expression of
genes involved in sugar utilization in response to the presence of the
corresponding sugar in the growth medium. The BglF sensor catalyzes different
activities depending on its stimulation state: in its non-stimulated state, it
phosphorylates the BglG transcriptional regulator, thus inactivating it; in the
presence of the stimulating sugar, it transports the sugar and phosphorylates it 
and also activates BglG by dephosphorylation, leading to bgl operon expression.
The sugar stimulates BglF by inducing a change in its membrane topology. BglG
exists in several conformations: a dimer, which is active, and compact and
non-compact monomers, which are inactive. BglF modulates the transition of BglG
from one conformation to another, depending on sugar availability. The two Bgl
proteins form a pre-complex at the membrane that dissociates upon stimulation,
enabling BglG to exert its effect on transcription.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2005.02.014 
PMID: 15802242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19306-18. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Dynamic membrane topology of the Escherichia coli beta-glucoside transporter
BglF.

Yagur-Kroll S(1), Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The Escherichia coli BglF protein, a permease of the
phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system, catalyzes transport and 
phosphorylation of beta-glucosides. In addition, BglF regulates bgl operon
expression by controlling the activity of the transcriptional regulator BglG via 
reversible phosphorylation. BglF is composed of three domains; one is
hydrophobic, which presumably forms the sugar translocation channel. We studied
the topology of this domain by Cys-replacement mutagenesis and chemical
modification by thiol reagents. Most Cys substitutions were well tolerated, as
demonstrated by the ability of the mutant proteins to catalyze BglF activities.
Our results suggest that the membrane domain contains eight transmembrane helices
and an alleged cytoplasmic loop that contains two additional helices. The latter 
region forms a dynamic structure, as evidenced by the alternation of residues
near its ends between faced-in and faced-out states. We suggest that this region,
together with the two transmembrane helices encompassing it, forms the sugar
translocation channel. BglF periplasmic loops are close to the membrane, the
first being a reentrant loop. This is the first systematic topological study
carried out with an intact phosphotransferase system permease and the first
demonstration of a reentrant loop in this group of proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410896200 
PMID: 15755739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6775-81.

Modulation of monomer conformation of the BglG transcriptional antiterminator
from Escherichia coli.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Lopian L, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The BglG protein positively regulates expression of the bgl operon in Escherichia
coli by binding as a dimer to the bgl transcript and preventing premature
termination of transcription in the presence of beta-glucosides. BglG activity is
negatively controlled by BglF, the beta-glucoside phosphotransferase, which
reversibly phosphorylates BglG according to beta-glucoside availability, thus
modulating its dimeric state. BglG consists of an RNA-binding domain and two
homologous domains, PRD1 and PRD2. Based on structural studies of a BglG
homologue, the two PRDs fold similarly, and the interactions within the dimer are
PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have recently shown that the affinity between PRD1
and PRD2 of BglG is high, and a fraction of the BglG monomers folds in the cell
into a compact conformation, in which PRD1 and PRD2 are in close proximity. We
show here that both BglG forms, the compact and noncompact, bind to the active
site-containing domain of BglF, IIB(bgl), in vitro. The interaction of BglG with 
IIB(bgl) or BglF is mediated by PRD2. Both BglG forms are detected as
phosphorylated proteins after in vitro phosphorylation with IIB(bgl) and are
dephosphorylated by BglF in vitro in the presence of beta-glucosides.
Nevertheless, genetic evidence indicates that the interaction of IIB(bgl) and
BglF with the compact form is seemingly less favorable. Using in vivo
cross-linking, we show that BglF enhances folding of BglG into a compact
conformation, whereas the addition of beta-glucosides reduces the amount of this 
form. Based on these results we suggest a model for the modulation of BglG
conformation and activity by BglF.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6775-6781.2004 
PMCID: PMC522206
PMID: 15466029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):50978-84. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

A fraction of the BglG transcriptional antiterminator from Escherichia coli
exists as a compact monomer.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Expression of the bgl operon in Escherichia coli, induced by beta-glucosides, is 
positively regulated by BglG, a transcriptional antiterminator. In the presence
of inducer, BglG dimerizes and binds to the bgl transcript to prevent premature
termination of transcription. The dimeric state of BglG is determined by BglF, a 
membrane-bound enzyme II of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase 
system (PTS), which reversibly phosphorylates BglG according to beta-glucoside
availability. BglG is composed of an RNA-binding domain followed by two
homologous PTS regulation domains (PRD1 and PRD2). The predicted structure of
dimeric LicT, a BglG homologue from Bacillus subtilis, suggests that the two PRDs
adopt a similar structure and that the interactions within the dimer are
PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have shown recently that the PRD1 and PRD2 domains of
BglG can form a stable heterodimer. We report here, based on in vitro and in vivo
cross-linking experiments, that a fraction of BglG is present in the cell in a
compact form in which PRD1 and PRD2 are in close proximity. The compact form is
present mainly in the BglG monomers. Our results imply that the monomer-dimer
transition involves a conformational change. The possible role of the compact
form in preventing untimely induction of the bgl operon is discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M308085200 
PMID: 14514681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46203-9. Epub 2003 Aug 15.

Interactions between the PTS regulation domains of the BglG transcriptional
antiterminator from Escherichia coli.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The E. coli BglG protein inhibits transcription termination within the bgl operon
in the presence of beta-glucosides. BglG represents a family of transcriptional
antiterminators that bind to RNA sequences, which partially overlap
rho-independent terminators, and prevent termination by stabilizing an
alternative structure of the transcript. The activity of BglG is determined by
its dimeric state, which is modulated by reversible phosphorylation catalyzed by 
BglF, a PTS permease. Only the non-phosphorylated BglG dimer binds to RNA and
allows read-through of transcription. BglG is composed of three domains: an
RNA-binding domain followed by two domains, PRD1 and PRD2 (PTS regulation
domains), which are similar in their sequence and folding. Based on the
three-dimensional structure of dimeric LicT, a BglG homologue from Bacillus
subtilis, the interactions within the dimer are PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have 
shown before that PRD2 mediates homodimerization very efficiently. Using genetic 
systems and in vitro techniques that assay and characterize protein-protein
interactions, we show here that the PRD1 dimerizes very slowly, but once it does,
the homodimers are stable. These results support our model that formation of BglG
dimers initiates with PRD2 dimerization followed by zipping up of two BglG
monomers to create the active RNA-binding domain. Moreover, our results
demonstrate that PRD1 and PRD2 heterodimerize efficiently in vitro and in vivo.
The affinity among the PRDs is in the following order: PRD2-PRD2 > PRD1-PRD2 >
PRD1-PRD1. The interaction between PRD1 and PRD2 offers an explanation for the
requirement of conserved residues in PRD1 for the phosphorylation of PRD2 by
BglF.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306506200 
PMID: 12923168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 10;100(12):7099-104. Epub 2003 May 27.

The BglF sensor recruits the BglG transcription regulator to the membrane and
releases it on stimulation.

Lopian L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, O'Day-Kerstein K, Wright A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The Escherichia coli BglF protein is a sugar-sensor that controls the activity of
the transcriptional antiterminator BglG by reversibly phosphorylating it,
depending on beta-glucoside availability. BglF is a membrane-bound protein,
whereas BglG is a soluble protein, and they are both present in the cell in
minute amounts. How do BglF and BglG find each other to initiate signal
transduction efficiently? Using bacterial two-hybrid systems and the Far-Western 
technique, we demonstrated unequivocally that BglG binds to BglF and to its
active site-containing domain in vivo and in vitro. Measurements by surface
plasmon resonance corroborated that the affinity between these proteins is high
enough to enable their stable binding. To visualize the subcellular localization 
of BglG, we used fluorescence microscopy. In cells lacking BglF, the BglG-GFP
fusion protein was evenly distributed throughout the cytoplasm. In contrast, in
cells producing BglF, BglG-GFP was localized to the membrane. On addition of
beta-glucoside, BglG-GFP was released from the membrane, becoming evenly
distributed throughout the cell. Using mutant proteins and genetic backgrounds
that impede phosphorylation of the Bgl proteins, we demonstrated that BglG-BglF
binding and recruitment of BglG to the membrane sensor requires phosphorylation
but does not depend on the individual phosphorylation sites of the Bgl proteins. 
We suggest a mechanism for rapid response to environmental changes by preassembly
of signaling complexes, which contain transcription regulators recruited by their
cognate sensors-kinases, under nonstimulating conditions, and release of the
regulators to the cytoplasm on stimulation. This mechanism might be applicable to
signaling cascades in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1037608100 
PMCID: PMC165836
PMID: 12771379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((btsR) AND (btsR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2019 Dec 1;366(24). pii: fnz251. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnz251.

Regulatory role of pyruvate-sensing BtsSR in biofilm formation by Escherichia
coli K-12.

Ogasawara H(1)(2)(3), Ishizuka T(1), Yamaji K(1), Kato Y(1), Shimada T(4),
Ishihama A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Supports to Advanced Science, Division of Gene Research,
Shinshu University, Tokida 3-15-1, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Fungal and Microbial Dynamism, Shinshu University,
Minamiminowa 8304, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan.
(3)Academic Assembly School of Humanities and Social Sciences Institute of
Humanities, Shinshu University, Asahi 3-1-1, Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.
(4)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashi Mita, Tama-ku,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.
(5)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, 3-7-2 Kajino-cho,
Koganei, Tokyo 184-8584, Japan.

Pyruvate, the key regulator in connection of a variety of metabolic pathways,
influences transcription of the Escherichia coli genome through controlling the
activity of two pyruvate-sensing two-component systems (TCSs), BtsSR and PyrSR.
Previously, we identified the whole set of regulatory targets of PyrSR with
low-affinity to pyruvate. Using gSELEX screening system, we found here that BtsSR
with high-affinity to pyruvate regulates more than 100 genes including as many as
13 transcription factors genes including the csgD gene encoding the master
regulator of biofilm formation. CsgD regulates more than 20 target genes
including the csg operons encoding the Curli fimbriae. In addition, we identified
the csgBAC as one of the regulatory targets of BtsR, thus indicating the
involvement of two pyruvate-dependent regulatory pathways of the curli formation:
indirect regulation by CsgD; and direct regulation by BtsR. Based on the findings
of the whole set of regulatory targets by two pyruvate-sensing BtsR and PyrR, we 
further propose an innovative concept that the pyruvate level-dependent
regulation of different gene sets takes place through two pyruvate-sensing TCS
systems, high-affinity BtsSR and low-affinity PyrSR to pyruvate.

© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnz251 
PMID: 31834370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2019 Jan 11;201(3). pii: e00610-18. doi: 10.1128/JB.00610-18. Print 
2019 Feb 1.

Importance of Pyruvate Sensing and Transport for the Resuscitation of Viable but 
Nonculturable Escherichia coli K-12.

Vilhena C(1), Kaganovitch E(2), Grünberger A(2), Motz M(1), Forné I(3), Kohlheyer
D(2), Jung K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, Department of Microbiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany.
(2)IBG-1: Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(3)Protein Analysis Unit, Biomedical Center Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, Department of Microbiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany jung@lmu.de.

Escherichia coli and many other bacterial species can enter into a viable but
nonculturable (VBNC) state, which is a survival strategy adopted by cells exposed
to adverse environmental conditions. Pyruvate is known to be one factor that
promotes resuscitation of VBNC cells. Here we studied the role of a
pyruvate-sensing network, composed of the histidine kinase-response regulator
systems BtsS/BtsR and YpdA/YpdB and the target gene btsT, encoding the
high-affinity pyruvate/H+ symporter BtsT, in the resuscitation of VBNC E. coli
K-12 cells after exposure to cold for 120 days. Analysis of the proteome of VBNC 
cells revealed upregulation, relative to exponentially growing cells, of BtsT and
other proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism. Provision of pyruvate stimulated 
protein and DNA biosynthesis, and thus resuscitation, in wild-type but not btsSR 
ypdAB mutant VBNC cells. This result was corroborated by time-dependent tracking 
of the resuscitation of individual VBNC E. coli cells observed in a microfluidic 
system. Finally, transport assays revealed that 14C-labeled pyruvate was rapidly 
taken up into VBNC cells by BtsT. These results provide the first evidence that
pyruvate is taken up as a carbon source for the resuscitation of VBNC E. coli
cells.IMPORTANCE Viable but nonculturable (VBNC) bacteria do not form colonies in
standard medium but otherwise retain their metabolic activity and can express
toxic proteins. Many bacterial genera, including Escherichia, Vibrio, and
Listeria, have been shown to enter the VBNC state upon exposure to adverse
conditions, such as low temperature, radiation, and starvation. Ultimately, these
organisms pose a public health risk with potential implications for the
pharmaceutical and food industries, as dormant organisms are especially difficult
to selectively eliminate and VBNC bacteria can be resuscitated if placed in an
environment with appropriate nutrition and temperature. Here we used a
microfluidic system to monitor the resuscitation of single VBNC cells over time. 
We provide new molecular insights into the initiation of resuscitation by
demonstrating that VBNC E. coli cells rapidly take up pyruvate with an inducible 
high-affinity transporter, whose expression is triggered by the BtsSR-YpdAB
sensing network.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00610-18 
PMCID: PMC6349089
PMID: 30420452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Membr Biol. 2018 Feb;251(1):65-74. doi: 10.1007/s00232-018-0014-2. Epub 2018
Jan 27.

Evidence of Cross-Regulation in Two Closely Related Pyruvate-Sensing Systems in
Uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Steiner BD(1), Eberly AR(2), Hurst MN(2), Zhang EW(2), Green HD(3), Behr S(4)(3),
Jung K(4), Hadjifrangiskou M(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Division of Molecular Pathogenesis, Department of Pathology, Microbiology &
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1161 21st Avenue South, MCN
A5225A, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.
(3)Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Nonnenwald 2, 82377, Penzberg, Germany.
(4)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany.
(5)Division of Molecular Pathogenesis, Department of Pathology, Microbiology &
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1161 21st Avenue South, MCN
A5225A, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA. maria.hadjifrangiskou@vanderbilt.edu.
(6)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA. maria.hadjifrangiskou@vanderbilt.edu.
(7)Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology & Inflammation, Nashville, TN, 
USA. maria.hadjifrangiskou@vanderbilt.edu.

Two-component systems (TCSs) dictate many bacterial responses to environmental
change via the activation of a membrane-embedded sensor kinase, which has
molecular specificity for a cognate response regulator protein. However, although
the majority of TCSs operate through seemingly strict cognate protein-protein
interactions, there have been several reports of TCSs that violate this classical
model of signal transduction. Our group has recently demonstrated that some of
these cross-interacting TCSs function in a manner that imparts a fitness
advantage to bacterial pathogens. In this study, we describe interconnectivity
between the metabolite-sensing TCSs YpdA/YpdB and BtsS/BtsR in uropathogenic
Escherichia coli (UPEC). The YpdA/YpdB and BtsS/BtsR TCSs have been previously
reported to interact in K12 E. coli, where they alter the expression of putative 
transporter genes yhjX and yjiY, respectively. These target genes are both
upregulated in UPEC during acute and chronic murine models of urinary tract
infection, as well as in response to pyruvate and serine added to growth media in
vitro. Here, we show that proper regulation of yhjX in UPEC requires the presence
of all components from both of these TCSs. By utilizing plasmid-encoded
luciferase reporters tracking the activity of the yhjX and yjiY promoters, we
demonstrate that deletions in one TCS substantially alter transcriptional
activity of the opposing system's target gene. However, unlike in K12 E. coli,
single gene deletions in the YpdA/YpdB system do not alter yjiY gene expression
in UPEC, suggesting that niche and lifestyle-specific pressures may be selecting 
for differential cross-regulation of TCSs in pathogenic and non-pathogenic E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-018-0014-2 
PMCID: PMC5834395
PMID: 29374286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2017 Dec 20;200(2). pii: e00599-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00599-17. Print 
2018 Jan 15.

BtsT, a Novel and Specific Pyruvate/H+ Symporter in Escherichia coli.

Kristoficova I(1), Vilhena C(1), Behr S(1), Jung K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany
jung@lmu.de.

The peptide transporter carbon starvation (CstA) family (transporter
classification [TC] 2.A.114) belongs to the second largest superfamily of
secondary transporters, the amino acid/polyamine/organocation (APC) superfamily. 
No representative of the CstA family has previously been characterized either
biochemically or structurally, but we have now identified the function of one of 
its members, the transport protein YjiY of Escherichia coli Expression of the
yjiY gene is regulated by the LytS-like histidine kinase BtsS, a sensor of
extracellular pyruvate, together with the LytTR-like response regulator BtsR.
YjiY consists of 716 amino acids, which form 18 putative transmembrane helices.
Transport studies with intact cells provided evidence that YjiY is a specific and
high-affinity transporter for pyruvate (Km , 16 μM). Furthermore, reconstitution 
of the purified YjiY into proteoliposomes revealed that YjiY is a pyruvate/H+
symporter. It has long been assumed that E. coli possesses a transporter(s) for
pyruvate, but the present study is the first to definitively identify such a
protein. Based on its function, we propose to change the name of the
uncharacterized gene yjiY to btsT for Brenztraubensäure (the German word for
pyruvate) transporter.IMPORTANCE BtsT (formerly known as YjiY) is found in many
commensal and pathogenic representatives of the Enterobacteriaceae This study for
the first time characterizes a pyruvate transporter in E. coli, BtsT, as a
specific pyruvate/H+ symporter. When nutrients are limiting, BtsT takes up
pyruvate from the medium, thus enabling it to be used as a carbon source for the 
growth and survival of E. coli.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00599-17 
PMCID: PMC5738728
PMID: 29061664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2017 Dec 5;200(1). pii: e00536-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00536-17. Print
2018 Jan 1.

A Single-Cell View of the BtsSR/YpdAB Pyruvate Sensing Network in Escherichia
coli and Its Biological Relevance.

Vilhena C(1), Kaganovitch E(2), Shin JY(1), Grünberger A(2), Behr S(1),
Kristoficova I(1), Brameyer S(1), Kohlheyer D(2)(3), Jung K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, Department of Microbiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Institute for Bio- and Geosciences (IBG-1), Department of Biotechnology,
Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(3)RWTH Aachen University-Microscale Bioengineering (AVT.MSB), Aachen, Germany.
(4)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, Department of Microbiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany jung@lmu.de.

Fluctuating environments and individual physiological diversity force bacteria to
constantly adapt and optimize the uptake of substrates. We focus here on two very
similar two-component systems (TCSs) of Escherichia coli belonging to the
LytS/LytTR family: BtsS/BtsR (formerly YehU/YehT) and YpdA/YpdB. Both TCSs
respond to extracellular pyruvate, albeit with different affinities, typically
during postexponential growth, and each system regulates expression of a single
transporter gene, yjiY and yhjX, respectively. To obtain insights into the
biological significance of these TCSs, we analyzed the activation of the target
promoters at the single-cell level. We found unimodal cell-to-cell variability;
however, the degree of variance was strongly influenced by the available
nutrients and differed between the two TCSs. We hypothesized that activation of
either of the TCSs helps individual cells to replenish carbon resources. To test 
this hypothesis, we compared wild-type cells with the btsSR ypdAB mutant under
two metabolically modulated conditions: protein overproduction and persister
formation. Although all wild-type cells were able to overproduce green
fluorescent protein (GFP), about half of the btsSR ypdAB population was unable to
overexpress GFP. Moreover, the percentage of persister cells, which tolerate
antibiotic stress, was significantly lower in the wild-type cells than in the
btsSR ypdAB population. Hence, we suggest that the BtsS/BtsR and YpdA/YpdB
network contributes to a balancing of the physiological state of all cells within
a population.IMPORTANCE Histidine kinase/response regulator (HK/RR) systems
enable bacteria to respond to environmental and physiological fluctuations.
Escherichia coli and other members of the Enterobacteriaceae possess two similar 
LytS/LytTR-type HK/RRs, BtsS/BtsR (formerly YehU/YehT) and YpdA/YpdB, which form 
a functional network. Both systems are activated in response to external
pyruvate, typically when cells face overflow metabolism during post-exponential
growth. Single-cell analysis of the activation of their respective target genes
yjiY and yhjX revealed cell-to-cell variability, and the range of variation was
strongly influenced by externally available nutrients. Based on the phenotypic
characterization of a btsSR ypdAB mutant compared to the parental strain, we
suggest that this TCS network supports an optimization of the physiological state
of the individuals within the population.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00536-17 
PMCID: PMC5717152
PMID: 29038258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 10;12(8):e0182993. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182993.
eCollection 2017.

Comparative analysis of LytS/LytTR-type histidine kinase/response regulator
systems in γ-proteobacteria.

Behr S(1), Brameyer S(1), Witting M(2)(3), Schmitt-Kopplin P(2)(3), Jung K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und
Umwelt (GmbH), Research Unit Analytical BioGeoChemistry, Neuherberg, Germany.
(3)TU München, Wissenschaftszentrum Weihenstephan für Ernährung, Landnutzung und 
Umwelt, Lehrstuhl für Analytische Lebensmittelchemie, Freising, Germany.

Bacterial histidine kinase/response regulator systems operate at the interface
between environmental cues and physiological states. Escherichia coli contains
two LytS/LytTR-type histidine kinase/response regulator systems, BtsS/BtsR
(formerly YehU/YehT) and YpdA/YpdB, which have been identified as
pyruvate-responsive two-component systems. Since they exhibit remarkable
similarity, we analyzed their phylogenetic distribution within the
γ-proteobacteria, and experimentally characterized them in a set of
representative species. We found that BtsS/BtsR is the predominant
LytS/LytTR-type two-component system among γ-proteobacteria, whereas YpdA/YpdB
primarily appears in a supplementary role. Based on our observations in E. coli, 
we used the highly conserved DNA-binding motifs to test the in vivo functionality
of both systems in various genera, including Salmonella, Enterobacter,
Citrobacter, Xenorhabdus, Yersinia, Aeromonas and Vibrio. The results suggest
that, in all cases tested, BtsS/BtsR and YpdA/YpdB respond to different levels of
pyruvate in the environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182993 
PMCID: PMC5552118
PMID: 28796832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Sci Rep. 2017 May 3;7(1):1388. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01410-2.

Identification of a High-Affinity Pyruvate Receptor in Escherichia coli.

Behr S(1), Kristoficova I(1), Witting M(2), Breland EJ(3), Eberly AR(4), Sachs
C(1), Schmitt-Kopplin P(2), Hadjifrangiskou M(4)(5), Jung K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 82152, Martinsried,
Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und
Umwelt (GmbH), Research Unit Analytical BioGeoChemistry, 85764, Neuherberg,
Germany.
(3)Departments of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN 37232, USA.
(4)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(5)Departments of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(6)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM) at the Department of
Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 82152, Martinsried,
Germany. jung@lmu.de.

Two-component systems are crucial for signal perception and modulation of
bacterial behavior. Nevertheless, to date, very few ligands have been identified 
that directly interact with histidine kinases. The histidine kinase/response
regulator system YehU/YehT of Escherichia coli is part of a nutrient-sensing
network. Here we demonstrate that this system senses the onset of nutrient
limitation in amino acid rich media and responds to extracellular pyruvate.
Binding of radiolabeled pyruvate was found for full-length YehU in right-side-out
membrane vesicles as well as for a truncated, membrane-integrated variant,
confirming that YehU is a high-affinity receptor for extracellular pyruvate.
Therefore we propose to rename YehU/YehT as BtsS/BtsR, after "Brenztraubensäure",
the name given to pyruvic acid when it was first synthesized. The function of
BtsS/BtsR was also assessed in a clinically relevant uropathogenic E. coli
strain. Quantitative transcriptional analysis revealed BtsS/BtsR importance
during acute and chronic urinary-tract infections.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01410-2 
PMCID: PMC5431176
PMID: 28469239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpP) AND (clpP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Mar 5;433(5):166815. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166815. Epub 2021
Jan 13.

ClpXP-mediated Degradation of the TAC Antitoxin is Neutralized by the SecB-like
Chaperone in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Texier P(1), Bordes P(2), Nagpal J(3), Sala AJ(1), Mansour M(1), Cirinesi AM(1), 
Xu X(1), Dougan DA(4), Genevaux P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
Electronic address: patricia.bordes@univ-tlse3.fr.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia. Electronic
address: d.dougan@latrobe.edu.au.
(5)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
Electronic address: pierre.genevaux@univ-tlse3.fr.

Bacterial toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are composed of a deleterious toxin and
its antagonistic antitoxin. They are widespread in bacterial genomes and mobile
genetic elements, and their functions remain largely unknown. Some TA systems,
known as TAC modules, include a cognate SecB-like chaperone that assists the
antitoxin in toxin inhibition. Here, we have investigated the involvement of
proteases in the activation cycle of the TAC system of the human pathogen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We show that the deletion of endogenous AAA+
proteases significantly bypasses the need for a dedicated chaperone and identify 
the mycobacterial ClpXP1P2 complex as the main protease involved in TAC antitoxin
degradation. In addition, we show that the ClpXP1P2 degron is located at the
extreme C-terminal end of the chaperone addiction (ChAD) region of the antitoxin,
demonstrating that ChAD functions as a hub for both chaperone binding and
recognition by proteases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166815 
PMID: 33450247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


2. Gene. 2021 Mar 30;774:145420. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.145420. Epub 2021 Jan 9.

Progress and prospect of single-molecular ClpX ATPase researching system-a
mini-review.

Kang ZH(1), Liu YT(2), Gou Y(2), Deng QR(2), Hu ZY(2), Li GR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioengineering, Sichuan University of Science & Engineering, Yibin
644005, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: zhkang85@126.com.
(2)School of Bioengineering, Sichuan University of Science & Engineering, Yibin
644005, Sichuan, China.
(3)Southwest University, Beibei 400716, Chongqing, China. Electronic address:
grli@swu.edu.

ClpXP in Escherichia coli is a proteasome degrading protein substrates. It
consists of one hexamer of ATPase (ClpX) and two heptamers of peptidase (ClpP).
The ClpX binds ATP and translocates the substrate protein into the ClpP chamber
by binding and hydrolysis of ATP. At single molecular level, ClpX harnesses
cycles of power stroke (dwell and burst) to unfold the substrates, then releases 
the ADP and Pi. Based on the construction and function of ClpXP, especially the
recent progress on how ClpX unfold protein substrates, in this mini-review, a
currently proposed single ClpX molecular model system detected by optical
tweezers, and its prospective for the elucidation of the mechanism of force
generation of ClpX in its power stroke and the subunit interaction with each
other, were discussed in detail.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.145420 
PMID: 33434627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100162. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013866. Epub 2020
Dec 10.

Degradation of MinD oscillator complexes by Escherichia coli ClpXP.

LaBreck CJ(1), Trebino CE(1), Ferreira CN(1), Morrison JJ(1), DiBiasio EC(1),
Conti J(1), Camberg JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, The University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island, USA.
(2)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, The University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island, USA. Electronic address: cambergj@uri.edu.

MinD is a cell division ATPase in Escherichia coli that oscillates from pole to
pole and regulates the spatial position of the cell division machinery. Together 
with MinC and MinE, the Min system restricts assembly of the FtsZ-ring to
midcell, oscillating between the opposite ends of the cell and preventing
FtsZ-ring misassembly at the poles. Here, we show that the ATP-dependent
bacterial proteasome complex ClpXP degrades MinD in reconstituted degradation
reactions in vitro and in vivo through direct recognition of the MinD N-terminal 
region. MinD degradation is enhanced during stationary phase, suggesting that
ClpXP regulates levels of MinD in cells that are not actively dividing. ClpXP is 
a major regulator of growth phase-dependent proteins, and these results suggest
that MinD levels are also controlled during stationary phase. In vitro, MinC and 
MinD are known to coassemble into linear polymers; therefore, we monitored
copolymers assembled in vitro after incubation with ClpXP and observed that ClpXP
promotes rapid MinCD copolymer destabilization and direct MinD degradation by
ClpXP. The N terminus of MinD, including residue Arg 3, which is near the
ATP-binding site in sequence, is critical for degradation by ClpXP. Together,
these results demonstrate that ClpXP degradation modifies conformational
assemblies of MinD in vitro and depresses Min function in vivo during periods of 
reduced proliferation.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013866 
PMCID: PMC7857489
PMID: 33288679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


4. Microbiologyopen. 2021 Jan;10(1):e1143. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.1143. Epub 2020 Dec 2.

Pantoea ananatis carotenoid production confers toxoflavin tolerance and is
regulated by Hfq-controlled quorum sensing.

Choi O(1), Kang B(2), Lee Y(2), Lee Y(3), Kim J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agriculture and Life Science, Gyeongsang National University,
Jinju, Korea.
(2)Division of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju,
Korea.
(3)Department of Plant Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea.

Carotenoids are widely used in functional foods, cosmetics, and health
supplements, and their importance and scope of use are continuously expanding.
Here, we characterized carotenoid biosynthetic genes of the plant-pathogenic
bacterium Pantoea ananatis, which carries a carotenoid biosynthetic gene cluster 
(including crtE, X, Y, I, B, and Z) on a plasmid. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis revealed that the
crtEXYIB gene cluster is transcribed as a single transcript and crtZ is
independently transcribed in the opposite direction. Using splicing by overlap
extension with polymerase chain reaction (SOE by PCR) based on asymmetric
amplification, we reassembled crtE-B, crtE-B-I, and crtE-B-I-Y. High-performance 
liquid chromatography confirmed that Escherichia coli expressing the reassembled 
crtE-B, crtE-B-I, and crtE-B-I-Y operons produced phytoene, lycopene, and
β-carotene, respectively. We found that the carotenoids conferred tolerance to UV
radiation and toxoflavin. Pantoea ananatis shares rice environments with the
toxoflavin producer Burkholderia glumae and is considered to be the first
reported example of producing and using carotenoids to withstand toxoflavin. We
confirmed that carotenoid production by P. ananatis depends on RpoS, which is
positively regulated by Hfq/ArcZ and negatively regulated by ClpP, similar to an 
important regulatory network of E. coli (HfqArcZ →RpoS Ͱ ClpXP). We also
demonstrated that Hfq-controlled quorum signaling de-represses EanR to activate
RpoS, thereby initiating carotenoid production. Survival genes such as those
responsible for the production of carotenoids of the plant-pathogenic P. ananatis
must be expressed promptly to overcome stressful environments and compete with
other microorganisms. This mechanism is likely maintained by a brake with
excellent performance, such as EanR.

© 2020 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1143 
PMCID: PMC7883899
PMID: 33269542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Elife. 2020 Dec 1;9. pii: e61451. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61451.

ClpAP proteolysis does not require rotation of the ClpA unfoldase relative to
ClpP.

Kim S(#)(1), Zuromski KL(#)(2), Bell TA(#)(1), Sauer RT(1), Baker TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

AAA+ proteases perform regulated protein degradation in all kingdoms of life and 
consist of a hexameric AAA+ unfoldase/translocase in complex with a
self-compartmentalized peptidase. Based on asymmetric features of cryo-EM
structures and a sequential hand-over-hand model of substrate translocation,
recent publications have proposed that the AAA+ unfoldases ClpA and ClpX rotate
with respect to their partner peptidase ClpP to allow function. Here, we test
this model by covalently crosslinking ClpA to ClpP to prevent rotation. We find
that crosslinked ClpAP complexes unfold, translocate, and degrade protein
substrates in vitro, albeit modestly slower than uncrosslinked enzyme controls.
Rotation of ClpA with respect to ClpP is therefore not required for ClpAP
protease activity, although some flexibility in how the AAA+ ring docks with ClpP
may be necessary for optimal function.

© 2020, Kim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61451 
PMCID: PMC7707817
PMID: 33258771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SK, KZ, TB, RS, TB No competing interests
declared


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Oct 13;117(41):25455-25463. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2014407117. Epub 2020 Oct 5.

Modular and coordinated activity of AAA+ active sites in the double-ring ClpA
unfoldase of the ClpAP protease.

Zuromski KL(1), Sauer RT(2), Baker TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139 tabaker@mit.edu.

ClpA is a hexameric double-ring AAA+ unfoldase/translocase that functions with
the ClpP peptidase to degrade proteins that are damaged or unneeded. How the 12
ATPase active sites of ClpA, 6 in the D1 ring and 6 in the D2 ring, work together
to fuel ATP-dependent degradation is not understood. We use site-specific
cross-linking to engineer ClpA hexamers with alternating ATPase-active and
ATPase-inactive modules in the D1 ring, the D2 ring, or both rings to determine
if these active sites function together. Our results demonstrate that D2 modules 
coordinate with D1 modules and ClpP during mechanical work. However, there is no 
requirement for adjacent modules in either ring to be active for efficient enzyme
function. Notably, ClpAP variants with just three alternating active D2 modules
are robust protein translocases and function with double the energetic efficiency
of ClpAP variants with completely active D2 rings. Although D2 is the more
powerful motor, three or six active D1 modules are important for high enzyme
processivity, which depends on D1 and D2 acting coordinately. These results
challenge sequential models of ATP hydrolysis and coupled mechanical work by
ClpAP and provide an engineering strategy that will be useful in testing other
aspects of ClpAP mechanism.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2014407117 
PMCID: PMC7568338
PMID: 33020301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


7. Cell Chem Biol. 2020 Nov 19;27(11):1396-1409.e10. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2020.08.006. Epub 2020 Sep 3.

Dioctatin Activates ClpP to Degrade Mitochondrial Components and Inhibits
Aflatoxin Production.

Furukawa T(1), Katayama H(2), Oikawa A(3), Negishi L(4), Ichikawa T(2), Suzuki
M(5), Murase K(5), Takayama S(5), Sakuda S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Teikyo
University, 1-1 Toyosatodai, Utsunomiya-shi, Tochigi 320-0003, Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Biochemistry, School of Engineering, Tokai University,
4-1-1 Kitakaname, Hiratsuka-shi, Kanagawa 259-1292, Japan.
(3)Department of Food, Life, and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Yamagata University, 1-4-12 Kojirakawa-machi, Yamagata-shi, Yamagata 990-8560,
Japan; RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, 1-7-22 Suehiro-chou,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(4)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
(5)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan.
(6)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Teikyo
University, 1-1 Toyosatodai, Utsunomiya-shi, Tochigi 320-0003, Japan. Electronic 
address: sakuda@nasu.bio.teikyo-u.ac.jp.

Aflatoxin contamination of crops is a serious problem worldwide. Utilization of
aflatoxin production inhibitors is attractive, as the elucidation of their modes 
of action contributes to clarifying the mechanism of aflatoxin production. Here, 
we identified mitochondrial protease ClpP as the target of dioctatin, an
inhibitor of aflatoxin production of Aspergillus flavus. Dioctatin conferred
uncontrolled caseinolytic capacity on ClpP of A. flavus and Escherichia coli.
Dioctatin-bound ClpP selectively degraded mitochondrial energy-related proteins
in vitro, including a subunit of respiratory chain complex V, which was also
reduced by dioctatin in a ClpP-dependent manner in vivo. Dioctatin enhanced
glycolysis and alcohol fermentation while reducing tricarboxylic acid cycle
metabolites. These disturbances were accompanied by reduced histone acetylation
and reduced expression of aflatoxin biosynthetic genes. Our results suggest that 
dioctatin inhibits aflatoxin production by inducing ClpP-mediated degradation of 
mitochondrial energy-related components, and that mitochondrial energy metabolism
functions as a key determinant of aflatoxin production.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2020.08.006 
PMID: 32888498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.


8. J Mol Biol. 2020 Aug 7;432(17):4908-4921. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.07.007. Epub
2020 Jul 17.

The Intrinsically Disordered N-terminal Extension of the ClpS Adaptor Reprograms 
Its Partner AAA+ ClpAP Protease.

Torres-Delgado A(1), Kotamarthi HC(1), Sauer RT(1), Baker TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. Electronic address: tabaker@mit.edu.

Adaptor proteins modulate substrate selection by AAA+ proteases. The ClpS adaptor
delivers N-degron substrates to ClpAP but inhibits degradation of substrates
bearing ssrA tags or other related degrons. How ClpS inhibits degradation of such
substrates is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that ClpS impedes
recognition of ssrA-tagged substrates by a non-competitive mechanism and also
slows subsequent unfolding/translocation of these substrates as well as of
N-degron substrates. This suppression of mechanical activity is largely a
consequence of the ability of ClpS to repress ATP hydrolysis by ClpA, but several
lines of evidence show that ClpS's inhibition of substrate binding and its ATPase
repression are separable activities. Using ClpS mutants and ClpS-ClpA chimeras,
we establish that engagement of the intrinsically disordered N-terminal extension
of ClpS by ClpA is both necessary and sufficient to inhibit multiple steps of
ClpAP-catalyzed degradation. These observations reveal how an adaptor can
simultaneously modulate the catalytic activity of a AAA+ enzyme, efficiently
promote recognition of some substrates, suppress recognition of other substrates,
and thereby affect degradation of its menu of substrates in a specific manner. We
propose that similar mechanisms are likely to be used by other adaptors to
regulate substrate choice and the catalytic activity of molecular machines.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.07.007 
PMCID: PMC7895464
PMID: 32687854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biomolecules. 2020 Apr 16;10(4). pii: E615. doi: 10.3390/biom10040615.

Insight into the RssB-Mediated Recognition and Delivery of σs to the AAA+
Protease, ClpXP.

Micevski D(1), Zeth K(2)(3), Mulhern TD(4), Schuenemann VJ(2), Zammit JE(1),
Truscott KN(1), Dougan DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne 3086, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Protein Evolution, Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental
Biology, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, DK-4000 Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville 3010, Victoria, Australia.

In Escherichia coli, SigmaS (σS) is the master regulator of the general stress
response. The cellular levels of σS are controlled by transcription, translation 
and protein stability. The turnover of σS, by the AAA+ protease (ClpXP), is
tightly regulated by a dedicated adaptor protein, termed RssB (Regulator of Sigma
S protein B)-which is an atypical member of the response regulator (RR) family.
Currently however, the molecular mechanism of σS recognition and delivery by RssB
is only poorly understood. Here we describe the crystal structures of both RssB
domains (RssBN and RssBC) and the SAXS analysis of full-length RssB (both free
and in complex with σS). Together with our biochemical analysis we propose a
model for the recognition and delivery of σS by this essential adaptor protein.
Similar to most bacterial RRs, the N-terminal domain of RssB (RssBN) comprises a 
typical mixed (βα)5-fold. Although phosphorylation of RssBN (at Asp58) is
essential for high affinity binding of σS, much of the direct binding to σS
occurs via the C-terminal effector domain of RssB (RssBC). In contrast to most
RRs the effector domain of RssB forms a β-sandwich fold composed of two sheets
surrounded by α-helical protrusions and as such, shares structural homology with 
serine/threonine phosphatases that exhibit a PPM/PP2C fold. Our biochemical data 
demonstrate that this domain plays a key role in both substrate interaction and
docking to the zinc binding domain (ZBD) of ClpX. We propose that RssB docking to
the ZBD of ClpX overlaps with the docking site of another regulator of RssB, the 
anti-adaptor IraD. Hence, we speculate that docking to ClpX may trigger release
of its substrate through activation of a "closed" state (as seen in the RssB-IraD
complex), thereby coupling adaptor docking (to ClpX) with substrate release. This
competitive docking to RssB would prevent futile interaction of ClpX with the
IraD-RssB complex (which lacks a substrate). Finally, substrate recognition by
RssB appears to be regulated by a key residue (Arg117) within the α5 helix of the
N-terminal domain. Importantly, this residue is not directly involved in σS
interaction, as σS binding to the R117A mutant can be restored by
phosphorylation. Likewise, R117A retains the ability to interact with and
activate ClpX for degradation of σS, both in the presence and absence of acetyl
phosphate. Therefore, we propose that this region of RssB (the α5 helix) plays a 
critical role in driving interaction with σS at a distal site.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10040615 
PMCID: PMC7226468
PMID: 32316259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2020 May;27(5):406-416. doi: 10.1038/s41594-020-0409-5. Epub
2020 Apr 20.

Conformational plasticity of the ClpAP AAA+ protease couples protein unfolding
and proteolysis.

Lopez KE(#)(1)(2), Rizo AN(#)(2)(3), Tse E(2), Lin J(4), Scull NW(5), Thwin
AC(2), Lucius AL(5), Shorter J(4), Southworth DR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Institute for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Graduate Program in Chemical Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Institute for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
daniel.southworth@ucsf.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The ClpAP complex is a conserved bacterial protease that unfolds and degrades
proteins targeted for destruction. The ClpA double-ring hexamer powers substrate 
unfolding and translocation into the ClpP proteolytic chamber. Here, we
determined high-resolution structures of wild-type Escherichia coli ClpAP
undergoing active substrate unfolding and proteolysis. A spiral of pore
loop-substrate contacts spans both ClpA AAA+ domains. Protomers at the spiral
seam undergo nucleotide-specific rearrangements, supporting substrate
translocation. IGL loops extend flexibly to bind the planar, heptameric ClpP
surface with the empty, symmetry-mismatched IGL pocket maintained at the seam.
Three different structures identify a binding-pocket switch by the IGL loop of
the lowest positioned protomer, involving release and re-engagement with the
clockwise pocket. This switch is coupled to a ClpA rotation and a network of
conformational changes across the seam, suggesting that ClpA can rotate around
the ClpP apical surface during processive steps of translocation and proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-020-0409-5 
PMCID: PMC7529148
PMID: 32313240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpP) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Jun;307(2):120-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Accumulation of sigmaS due to enhanced synthesis and decreased degradation in
acidic phospholipid-deficient Escherichia coli cells.

Uchiyama J(1), Sasaki Y, Nagahama H, Itou A, Matsuoka S, Matsumoto K, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science
and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.

The Escherichia coli pgsA3 mutation, which causes deficiency in acidic
phospholipids, leads to a significant accumulation of sigma(S). This accumulation
is partly accounted for by the higher transcription level of rpoS; however, it
has also been suggested that the cells accumulate sigma(S)
post-transcriptionally. We found that the level of the small regulatory RNA RprA,
which is involved in the promotion of rpoS translation, is higher in pgsA3 cells 
than in pgsA(+) cells. Induction of altered rpoS mRNA that does not depend on
RprA in pgsA(+) cells did not increase the level of sigma(S) to the high level
observed in pgsA3 cells, suggesting post-translational sigma(S) accumulation in
the latter. The mRNA levels of clpX and clpP, whose products form a ClpXP
protease that degrades sigma(S), were much reduced in pgsA3 cells. Consistent
with the reduced mRNA levels, the half-life of sigma(S) in pgsA3 cells was much
longer than in pgsA(+) cells, indicating that downregulation of the degradation
is a major cause for the high sigma(S) content. We show that the downregulation
can be partially attributed to activated CpxAR in the mutant cells, which causes 
repression of rpoE on whose gene product the expression of clpPX depends.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x 
PMID: 20455949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Extremophiles. 2004 Jun;8(3):209-17. Epub 2004 Feb 27.

Transcriptional analysis of dynamic heat-shock response by the hyperthermophilic 
bacterium Thermotoga maritima.

Pysz MA(1), Ward DE, Shockley KR, Montero CI, Conners SB, Johnson MR, Kelly RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC 27695-7905, USA.

The thermal stress response of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga
maritima was characterized using a 407-open reading frame-targeted cDNA
microarray. Transient gene expression was followed for 90 min, following a shift 
from 80 degrees C to 90 degrees C. While some aspects of mesophilic heat-shock
response were conserved in T. maritima, genome content suggested differentiating 
features that were borne out by transcriptional analysis. Early induction of
predicted heat-shock operons hrcA-grpE-dnaJ (TM0851-TM0850-TM0849), groES-groEL
(TM0505-TM0506), and dnaK-sHSP (TM0373-TM0374) was consistent with conserved
CIRCE elements upstream of hrcA and groES. Induction of the T. maritima rpoE/
sigW and rpoD/ sigA homologs suggests a mechanism for global heat-shock response 
in the absence of an identifiable ortholog to a major heat-shock sigma factor. In
contrast to heat-shock response in Escherichia coli, the majority of genes
encoding ATP-dependent proteases were downregulated, including clpP (TM0695),
clpQ (TM0521), clpY (TM0522), lonA (TM1633), and lonB (TM1869). Notably, T.
maritima showed indications of a late heat-shock response with the induction of a
marR homolog (TM0816), several other putative transcriptional regulators (TM1023,
TM1069), and two alpha-glucosidases (TM0434 and TM1068). Taken together, the
results reported here indicate that, while T. maritima shares core elements of
the bacterial heat-shock response with mesophiles, the thermal stress regulatory 
strategies of this organism differ significantly. However, it remains to be
elucidated whether these differences are related to thermophilicity or
phylogenetic placement.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-004-0379-2 
PMID: 14991425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpX) AND (clpX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Mar 5;433(5):166815. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166815. Epub 2021
Jan 13.

ClpXP-mediated Degradation of the TAC Antitoxin is Neutralized by the SecB-like
Chaperone in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Texier P(1), Bordes P(2), Nagpal J(3), Sala AJ(1), Mansour M(1), Cirinesi AM(1), 
Xu X(1), Dougan DA(4), Genevaux P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
Electronic address: patricia.bordes@univ-tlse3.fr.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia. Electronic
address: d.dougan@latrobe.edu.au.
(5)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et de Génétique Moléculaires, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative (CBI), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.
Electronic address: pierre.genevaux@univ-tlse3.fr.

Bacterial toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are composed of a deleterious toxin and
its antagonistic antitoxin. They are widespread in bacterial genomes and mobile
genetic elements, and their functions remain largely unknown. Some TA systems,
known as TAC modules, include a cognate SecB-like chaperone that assists the
antitoxin in toxin inhibition. Here, we have investigated the involvement of
proteases in the activation cycle of the TAC system of the human pathogen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We show that the deletion of endogenous AAA+
proteases significantly bypasses the need for a dedicated chaperone and identify 
the mycobacterial ClpXP1P2 complex as the main protease involved in TAC antitoxin
degradation. In addition, we show that the ClpXP1P2 degron is located at the
extreme C-terminal end of the chaperone addiction (ChAD) region of the antitoxin,
demonstrating that ChAD functions as a hub for both chaperone binding and
recognition by proteases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166815 
PMID: 33450247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


2. Nat Commun. 2021 Jan 12;12(1):281. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-20553-x.

Functional cooperativity between the trigger factor chaperone and the ClpXP
proteolytic complex.

Rizzolo K(#)(1)(2), Yu AYH(#)(1)(3), Ologbenla A(1), Kim SR(1), Zhu H(4),
Ishimori K(4)(5), Thibault G(1)(6), Leung E(1), Zhang YW(1), Teng M(1),
Haniszewski M(1), Miah N(1), Phanse S(1)(7)(8), Minic Z(8)(9), Lee S(10),
Caballero JD(11), Babu M(8), Tsai FTF(10)(12)(13), Saio T(14), Houry WA(15)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1M1,
Canada.
(2)Dewpoint Therapeutics, 6 Tide Street, Boston, MA, 02210, USA.
(3)Pfizer Inc., 401 N Middletown Rd, Pearl River, NY, 10965, USA.
(4)Graduate School of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo, Hokkaido, 060-8628, Japan.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo,
Hokkaido, 060-0810, Japan.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
637551, Singapore.
(7)The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 3E1, Canada.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan, S4S
0A2, Canada.
(9)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, University of Ottawa, John
L. Holmes, Mass Spectrometry Facility, Ottawa, ON, K1N 1A2, Canada.
(10)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(11)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
M5S 3G5, Canada.
(12)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(13)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(14)Institute of Advanced Medical Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima,
770-8503, Japan.
(15)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1M1,
Canada. walid.houry@utoronto.ca.
(16)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H6, Canada.
walid.houry@utoronto.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2021 May 6;12(1):2753.

A functional association is uncovered between the ribosome-associated trigger
factor (TF) chaperone and the ClpXP degradation complex. Bioinformatic analyses
demonstrate conservation of the close proximity of tig, the gene coding for TF,
and genes coding for ClpXP, suggesting a functional interaction. The effect of TF
on ClpXP-dependent degradation varies based on the nature of substrate. While
degradation of some substrates are slowed down or are unaffected by TF,
surprisingly, TF increases the degradation rate of a third class of substrates.
These include λ phage replication protein λO, master regulator of stationary
phase RpoS, and SsrA-tagged proteins. Globally, TF acts to enhance the
degradation of about 2% of newly synthesized proteins. TF is found to interact
through multiple sites with ClpX in a highly dynamic fashion to promote protein
degradation. This chaperone-protease cooperation constitutes a unique and likely 
ancestral aspect of cellular protein homeostasis in which TF acts as an adaptor
for ClpXP.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-20553-x 
PMCID: PMC7804408
PMID: 33436616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Gene. 2021 Mar 30;774:145420. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.145420. Epub 2021 Jan 9.

Progress and prospect of single-molecular ClpX ATPase researching system-a
mini-review.

Kang ZH(1), Liu YT(2), Gou Y(2), Deng QR(2), Hu ZY(2), Li GR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioengineering, Sichuan University of Science & Engineering, Yibin
644005, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: zhkang85@126.com.
(2)School of Bioengineering, Sichuan University of Science & Engineering, Yibin
644005, Sichuan, China.
(3)Southwest University, Beibei 400716, Chongqing, China. Electronic address:
grli@swu.edu.

ClpXP in Escherichia coli is a proteasome degrading protein substrates. It
consists of one hexamer of ATPase (ClpX) and two heptamers of peptidase (ClpP).
The ClpX binds ATP and translocates the substrate protein into the ClpP chamber
by binding and hydrolysis of ATP. At single molecular level, ClpX harnesses
cycles of power stroke (dwell and burst) to unfold the substrates, then releases 
the ADP and Pi. Based on the construction and function of ClpXP, especially the
recent progress on how ClpX unfold protein substrates, in this mini-review, a
currently proposed single ClpX molecular model system detected by optical
tweezers, and its prospective for the elucidation of the mechanism of force
generation of ClpX in its power stroke and the subunit interaction with each
other, were discussed in detail.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.145420 
PMID: 33434627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100162. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013866. Epub 2020
Dec 10.

Degradation of MinD oscillator complexes by Escherichia coli ClpXP.

LaBreck CJ(1), Trebino CE(1), Ferreira CN(1), Morrison JJ(1), DiBiasio EC(1),
Conti J(1), Camberg JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, The University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island, USA.
(2)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, The University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island, USA. Electronic address: cambergj@uri.edu.

MinD is a cell division ATPase in Escherichia coli that oscillates from pole to
pole and regulates the spatial position of the cell division machinery. Together 
with MinC and MinE, the Min system restricts assembly of the FtsZ-ring to
midcell, oscillating between the opposite ends of the cell and preventing
FtsZ-ring misassembly at the poles. Here, we show that the ATP-dependent
bacterial proteasome complex ClpXP degrades MinD in reconstituted degradation
reactions in vitro and in vivo through direct recognition of the MinD N-terminal 
region. MinD degradation is enhanced during stationary phase, suggesting that
ClpXP regulates levels of MinD in cells that are not actively dividing. ClpXP is 
a major regulator of growth phase-dependent proteins, and these results suggest
that MinD levels are also controlled during stationary phase. In vitro, MinC and 
MinD are known to coassemble into linear polymers; therefore, we monitored
copolymers assembled in vitro after incubation with ClpXP and observed that ClpXP
promotes rapid MinCD copolymer destabilization and direct MinD degradation by
ClpXP. The N terminus of MinD, including residue Arg 3, which is near the
ATP-binding site in sequence, is critical for degradation by ClpXP. Together,
these results demonstrate that ClpXP degradation modifies conformational
assemblies of MinD in vitro and depresses Min function in vivo during periods of 
reduced proliferation.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013866 
PMCID: PMC7857489
PMID: 33288679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


5. Elife. 2020 Dec 1;9. pii: e61451. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61451.

ClpAP proteolysis does not require rotation of the ClpA unfoldase relative to
ClpP.

Kim S(#)(1), Zuromski KL(#)(2), Bell TA(#)(1), Sauer RT(1), Baker TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

AAA+ proteases perform regulated protein degradation in all kingdoms of life and 
consist of a hexameric AAA+ unfoldase/translocase in complex with a
self-compartmentalized peptidase. Based on asymmetric features of cryo-EM
structures and a sequential hand-over-hand model of substrate translocation,
recent publications have proposed that the AAA+ unfoldases ClpA and ClpX rotate
with respect to their partner peptidase ClpP to allow function. Here, we test
this model by covalently crosslinking ClpA to ClpP to prevent rotation. We find
that crosslinked ClpAP complexes unfold, translocate, and degrade protein
substrates in vitro, albeit modestly slower than uncrosslinked enzyme controls.
Rotation of ClpA with respect to ClpP is therefore not required for ClpAP
protease activity, although some flexibility in how the AAA+ ring docks with ClpP
may be necessary for optimal function.

© 2020, Kim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61451 
PMCID: PMC7707817
PMID: 33258771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SK, KZ, TB, RS, TB No competing interests
declared


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Nov 10;117(45):28005-28013. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2010804117. Epub 2020 Oct 26.

Multistep substrate binding and engagement by the AAA+ ClpXP protease.

Saunders RA(1), Stinson BM(1), Baker TA(1)(2), Sauer RT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139; bobsauer@mit.edu.

Escherichia coli ClpXP is one of the most thoroughly studied AAA+ proteases, but 
relatively little is known about the reactions that allow it to bind and then
engage specific protein substrates before the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-fueled
mechanical unfolding and translocation steps that lead to processive degradation.
Here, we employ a fluorescence-quenching assay to study the binding of
ssrA-tagged substrates to ClpXP. Polyphasic stopped-flow association and
dissociation kinetics support the existence of at least three distinct
substrate-bound complexes. These kinetic data fit well to a model in which ClpXP 
and substrate form an initial recognition complex followed by an intermediate
complex and then, an engaged complex that is competent for substrate unfolding.
The initial association and dissociation steps do not require ATP hydrolysis, but
subsequent forward and reverse kinetic steps are accelerated by faster ATP
hydrolysis. Our results, together with recent cryo-EM structures of ClpXP bound
to substrates, support a model in which the ssrA degron initially binds in the
top portion of the axial channel of the ClpX hexamer and then is translocated
deeper into the channel in steps that eventually pull the native portion of the
substrate against the channel opening. Reversible initial substrate binding
allows ClpXP to check potential substrates for degrons, potentially increasing
specificity. Subsequent substrate engagement steps allow ClpXP to grip a wide
variety of sequences to ensure efficient unfolding and translocation of almost
any native substrate.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2010804117 
PMCID: PMC7668067
PMID: 33106413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


7. Elife. 2020 Oct 22;9. pii: e61496. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61496.

Structural basis of ClpXP recognition and unfolding of ssrA-tagged substrates.

Fei X(#)(1), Bell TA(#)(1), Barkow SR(2), Baker TA(1), Sauer RT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(2)Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

When ribosomes fail to complete normal translation, all cells have mechanisms to 
ensure degradation of the resulting partial proteins to safeguard proteome
integrity. In Escherichia coli and other eubacteria, the tmRNA system rescues
stalled ribosomes and adds an ssrA tag or degron to the C-terminus of the
incomplete protein, which directs degradation by the AAA+ ClpXP protease. Here,
we present cryo-EM structures of ClpXP bound to the ssrA degron. C-terminal
residues of the ssrA degron initially bind in the top of an otherwise closed ClpX
axial channel and subsequently move deeper into an open channel. For short-degron
protein substrates, we show that unfolding can occur directly from the initial
closed-channel complex. For longer degron substrates, our studies illuminate how 
ClpXP transitions from specific recognition into a nonspecific unfolding and
translocation machine. Many AAA+ proteases and protein-remodeling motors are
likely to employ similar multistep recognition and engagement strategies.

© 2020, Fei et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61496 
PMCID: PMC7652416
PMID: 33089779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: XF, TB, SB, TB, RS No competing interests
declared


8. J Bacteriol. 2020 Aug 25;202(18). pii: e00235-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00235-20. Print
2020 Aug 25.

During Oxidative Stress the Clp Proteins of Escherichia coli Ensure that Iron
Pools Remain Sufficient To Reactivate Oxidized Metalloenzymes.

Sen A(1), Zhou Y(1), Imlay JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA
jimlay@illinois.edu.

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is formed in natural environments by both biotic and
abiotic processes. It easily enters the cytoplasms of microorganisms, where it
can disrupt growth by inactivating iron-dependent enzymes. It also reacts with
the intracellular iron pool, generating hydroxyl radicals that can lethally
damage DNA. Therefore, virtually all bacteria possess H2O2-responsive
transcription factors that control defensive regulons. These typically include
catalases and peroxidases that scavenge H2O2 Another common component is the
miniferritin Dps, which sequesters loose iron and thereby suppresses
hydroxyl-radical formation. In this study, we determined that Escherichia coli
also induces the ClpS and ClpA proteins of the ClpSAP protease complex. Mutants
that lack this protease, plus its partner, ClpXP protease, cannot grow when H2O2 
levels rise. The growth defect was traced to the inactivity of dehydratases in
the pathway of branched-chain amino acid synthesis. These enzymes rely on a
solvent-exposed [4Fe-4S] cluster that H2O2 degrades. In a typical cell the
cluster is continuously repaired, but in the clpSA clpX mutant the repair process
is defective. We determined that this disability is due to an excessively small
iron pool, apparently due to the oversequestration of iron by Dps. Dps was
previously identified as a substrate of both the ClpSAP and ClpXP proteases, and 
in their absence its levels are unusually high. The implication is that the
stress response to H2O2 has evolved to strike a careful balance, diminishing iron
pools enough to protect the DNA but keeping them substantial enough that critical
iron-dependent enzymes can be repaired.IMPORTANCE Hydrogen peroxide mediates the 
toxicity of phagocytes, lactic acid bacteria, redox-cycling antibiotics, and
photochemistry. The underlying mechanisms all involve its reaction with iron
atoms, whether in enzymes or on the surface of DNA. Accordingly, when bacteria
perceive toxic H2O2, they activate defensive tactics that are focused on iron
metabolism. In this study, we identify a conundrum: DNA is best protected by the 
removal of iron from the cytoplasm, but this action impairs the ability of the
cell to reactivate its iron-dependent enzymes. The actions of the Clp proteins
appear to hedge against the oversequestration of iron by the miniferritin Dps.
This buffering effect is important, because E. coli seeks not just to survive
H2O2 but to grow in its presence.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00235-20 
PMCID: PMC7925084
PMID: 32601069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biomolecules. 2020 Apr 16;10(4). pii: E615. doi: 10.3390/biom10040615.

Insight into the RssB-Mediated Recognition and Delivery of σs to the AAA+
Protease, ClpXP.

Micevski D(1), Zeth K(2)(3), Mulhern TD(4), Schuenemann VJ(2), Zammit JE(1),
Truscott KN(1), Dougan DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne 3086, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Protein Evolution, Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental
Biology, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, DK-4000 Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville 3010, Victoria, Australia.

In Escherichia coli, SigmaS (σS) is the master regulator of the general stress
response. The cellular levels of σS are controlled by transcription, translation 
and protein stability. The turnover of σS, by the AAA+ protease (ClpXP), is
tightly regulated by a dedicated adaptor protein, termed RssB (Regulator of Sigma
S protein B)-which is an atypical member of the response regulator (RR) family.
Currently however, the molecular mechanism of σS recognition and delivery by RssB
is only poorly understood. Here we describe the crystal structures of both RssB
domains (RssBN and RssBC) and the SAXS analysis of full-length RssB (both free
and in complex with σS). Together with our biochemical analysis we propose a
model for the recognition and delivery of σS by this essential adaptor protein.
Similar to most bacterial RRs, the N-terminal domain of RssB (RssBN) comprises a 
typical mixed (βα)5-fold. Although phosphorylation of RssBN (at Asp58) is
essential for high affinity binding of σS, much of the direct binding to σS
occurs via the C-terminal effector domain of RssB (RssBC). In contrast to most
RRs the effector domain of RssB forms a β-sandwich fold composed of two sheets
surrounded by α-helical protrusions and as such, shares structural homology with 
serine/threonine phosphatases that exhibit a PPM/PP2C fold. Our biochemical data 
demonstrate that this domain plays a key role in both substrate interaction and
docking to the zinc binding domain (ZBD) of ClpX. We propose that RssB docking to
the ZBD of ClpX overlaps with the docking site of another regulator of RssB, the 
anti-adaptor IraD. Hence, we speculate that docking to ClpX may trigger release
of its substrate through activation of a "closed" state (as seen in the RssB-IraD
complex), thereby coupling adaptor docking (to ClpX) with substrate release. This
competitive docking to RssB would prevent futile interaction of ClpX with the
IraD-RssB complex (which lacks a substrate). Finally, substrate recognition by
RssB appears to be regulated by a key residue (Arg117) within the α5 helix of the
N-terminal domain. Importantly, this residue is not directly involved in σS
interaction, as σS binding to the R117A mutant can be restored by
phosphorylation. Likewise, R117A retains the ability to interact with and
activate ClpX for degradation of σS, both in the presence and absence of acetyl
phosphate. Therefore, we propose that this region of RssB (the α5 helix) plays a 
critical role in driving interaction with σS at a distal site.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10040615 
PMCID: PMC7226468
PMID: 32316259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 May;104(9):4171-4184. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10507-0. Epub 2020 Mar 18.

Genomic, transcriptomic, and metabolic characterizations of Escherichia coli
adapted to branched-chain higher alcohol tolerance.

Wang B(1)(2), Guo Y(1), Xu Z(1), Tu R(1), Wang Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Tianjin Institute of
Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, People's Republic
of China.
(2)SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science 
and Engineering (Tianjin), School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Tianjin Institute of
Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, People's Republic
of China. wang_qh@tib.cas.cn.

Microbial-produced branched-chain higher alcohols (BCHAs), such as isopropanol,
isobutanol, and isopentanol in Escherichia coli, have emerged as promising
alternative biofuels under development. Elucidating and improving the tolerance
of E. coli to BCHAs are important issues for microbial production of BCHAs due to
their physiological inhibitory effect. Previous works aimed at understanding the 
genetic basis of E. coli tolerance to BCHAs with a comparative genome, reverse
engineering, or transcriptome approach have gained some important insights into
the mechanism of tolerance. However, investigation on BCHA tolerance from the
whole-genomic, transcriptomic, and metabolic levels via a systematic approach has
not yet been completely elucidated. Here, in this study, genomic, transcriptomic,
and 13C-metabolic flux analyses (13C-MFA) of an evolved E. coli strain adapted to
BCHA tolerance were conducted. Genome mutation of negative regulation factor
(rssB, acrB, and clpX) of RpoS level suggested upregulation of RpoS activity in
BCHA tolerance of E. coli. From a more detailed perspective, enhanced energy
metabolism was observed to be the main characteristic of E. coli strain tolerant 
to BCHAs. Enhanced energy metabolism has been achieved through several routes,
which included redistribution of the central carbon metabolism, upregulation of
the energy generation machinery, and facilitating the operation of electron
transferring chain. Evidence of multiple solutions of genotype modification
toward BCHA tolerance was also revealed through comparative analysis of previous 
works from different groups.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10507-0 
PMID: 32189046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpX) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Jun;307(2):120-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Accumulation of sigmaS due to enhanced synthesis and decreased degradation in
acidic phospholipid-deficient Escherichia coli cells.

Uchiyama J(1), Sasaki Y, Nagahama H, Itou A, Matsuoka S, Matsumoto K, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science
and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.

The Escherichia coli pgsA3 mutation, which causes deficiency in acidic
phospholipids, leads to a significant accumulation of sigma(S). This accumulation
is partly accounted for by the higher transcription level of rpoS; however, it
has also been suggested that the cells accumulate sigma(S)
post-transcriptionally. We found that the level of the small regulatory RNA RprA,
which is involved in the promotion of rpoS translation, is higher in pgsA3 cells 
than in pgsA(+) cells. Induction of altered rpoS mRNA that does not depend on
RprA in pgsA(+) cells did not increase the level of sigma(S) to the high level
observed in pgsA3 cells, suggesting post-translational sigma(S) accumulation in
the latter. The mRNA levels of clpX and clpP, whose products form a ClpXP
protease that degrades sigma(S), were much reduced in pgsA3 cells. Consistent
with the reduced mRNA levels, the half-life of sigma(S) in pgsA3 cells was much
longer than in pgsA(+) cells, indicating that downregulation of the degradation
is a major cause for the high sigma(S) content. We show that the downregulation
can be partially attributed to activated CpxAR in the mutant cells, which causes 
repression of rpoE on whose gene product the expression of clpPX depends.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x 
PMID: 20455949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((comR) AND (comR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. mSphere. 2018 Oct 31;3(5). pii: e00444-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00444-18.

Intracellular Signaling by the comRS System in Streptococcus mutans Genetic
Competence.

Underhill SAM(1), Shields RC(2), Kaspar JR(2), Haider M(1), Burne RA(2), Hagen
SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
sjhagen@ufl.edu.

Erratum in
    mSphere. 2019 Feb 13;4(1):.

Entry into genetic competence in streptococci is controlled by ComX, an
alternative sigma factor for genes that enable the import of exogenous DNA. In
Streptococcus mutans, the immediate activator of comX is the ComRS quorum system.
ComS is the precursor of XIP, a seven-residue peptide that is imported into the
cell and interacts with the cytosolic receptor ComR to form a transcriptional
activator for both comX and comS Although intercellular quorum signaling by ComRS
has been demonstrated, observations of bimodal expression of comX suggest that
comRS may also function as an intracellular feedback loop, activating comX
without export or detection of extracellular XIP. Here we used microfluidic and
single-cell methods to test whether ComRS induction of comX requires
extracellular XIP or ComS. We found that individual comS-overexpressing cells
activate their own comX, independently of the rate at which their growth medium
is replaced. However, in the absence of lysis they do not activate comS-deficient
mutants growing in coculture. We also found that induction of comR and comS genes
introduced into Escherichia coli cells leads to activation of a comX reporter.
Therefore, ComRS control of comX does not require either the import or
extracellular accumulation of ComS or XIP or specific processing of ComS to XIP. 
We also found that endogenously and exogenously produced ComS and XIP have
inequivalent effects on comX activation. These data are fully consistent with
identification of intracellular positive feedback in comS transcription as the
origin of bimodal comX expression in S. mutans IMPORTANCE The ComRS system can
function as a quorum sensing trigger for genetic competence in S. mutans The
signal peptide XIP, which is derived from the precursor ComS, enters the cell and
interacts with the Rgg-type cytosolic receptor ComR to activate comX, which
encodes the alternative sigma factor for the late competence genes. Previous
studies have demonstrated intercellular signaling via ComRS, although release of 
the ComS or XIP peptide to the extracellular medium appears to require lysis of
the producing cells. Here we tested the complementary hypothesis that ComRS can
drive comX through a purely intracellular mechanism that does not depend on
extracellular accumulation or import of ComS or XIP. By combining single-cell,
coculture, and microfluidic approaches, we demonstrated that endogenously
produced ComS can enable ComRS to activate comX without requiring processing,
export, or import. These data provide insight into intracellular mechanisms that 
generate noise and heterogeneity in S. mutans competence.

Copyright © 2018 Underhill et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00444-18 
PMCID: PMC6211226
PMID: 30381353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biometals. 2012 Feb;25(1):33-43. doi: 10.1007/s10534-011-9510-x. Epub 2011 Nov
17.

The copper-inducible ComR (YcfQ) repressor regulates expression of ComC (YcfR),
which affects copper permeability of the outer membrane of Escherichia coli.

Mermod M(1), Magnani D, Solioz M, Stoyanov JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bern, Murtenstrasse 35,
3010, Berne, Switzerland.

The pathway of copper entry into Escherichia coli is still unknown. In an attempt
to shed light on this process, a lux-based biosensor was utilized to monitor
intracellular copper levels in situ. From a transposon-mutagenized library,
strains were selected in which copper entry into cells was reduced, apparent as
clones with reduced luminescence when grown in the presence of copper
(low-glowers). One low-glower had a transposon insertion in the comR gene, which 
encodes a TetR-like transcriptional regulator. The mutant strain could be
complemented by the comR gene on a plasmid, restoring luminescence to wild-type
levels. ComR did not regulate its own expression, but was required for
copper-induction of the neighboring, divergently transcribed comC gene, as shown 
by real-time quantitative PCR and with a promoter-lux fusion. The purified ComR
regulator bound to the promoter region of the comC gene in vitro and was released
by copper. By membrane fractionation, ComC was shown to be localized in the outer
membrane. When grown in the presence of copper, ∆comC cells had higher
periplasmic and cytoplasmic copper levels, compared to the wild-type, as assessed
by the activation of the periplasmic CusRS sensor and the cytoplasmic CueR
sensor, respectively. Thus, ComC is an outer membrane protein which lowers the
permeability of the outer membrane to copper. The expression of ComC is
controlled by ComR, a novel, TetR-like copper-responsive repressor.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-011-9510-x 
PMID: 22089859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. DNA Res. 1997 Feb 28;4(1):9-18.

Comparison between the Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis genomes suggests
that a major function of polynucleotide phosphorylase is to synthesize CDP.

Danchin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Département de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Paris,
France. adanchin@pasteur.fr

Genome comparison permits identification of chromosome regions conserved during
evolution. Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli are so distant that there
exists very few conserved landmarks in their genome organisation. Analysis of the
conserved cmk rpsA cluster pinpointed the importance of cytosine nucleotide
metabolism. In these bacteria, mRNA turnover provides an efficient means to
fulfil the need for CDP as a precursor of DNA synthesis. The cmk rpsA operon is
responsible for CDP synthesis. This function is self-explained in the case of the
cmk gene (which codes for cytidylate kinase). The case of rpsA, that codes for
ribosomal protein S1, is more subtle. It is suggested here that S1 is a
RNA-binding protein helping polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase, known to be
phylogenetically related to S1) to degrade mRNA, or helper molecule involved in
other RNase activities. This provides an explanation for the elusive function of 
PNPase, which generates nucleoside diphosphates (not monophosphates) when
degrading RNA. This also accounts for the discovery that the B. subtilis comR
gene product is PNPase. This article briefly discusses the availability of
cytosine nucleotides in eukaryotes, and suggests that they are derived from
phospholipids turnover. Finally, the GC content of genomes is discussed in this
new light.

DOI: 10.1093/dnares/4.1.9 
PMID: 9179491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Jan;19(2):343-56.

Polynucleotide phosphorylase is necessary for competence development in Bacillus 
subtilis.

Luttinger A(1), Hahn J, Dubnau D.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, New York, New York 10016, USA.

comR (pnpA) is a newly identified gene in Bacillus subtilis that is necessary for
the expression of late competence genes. Transformability of a comR (pnpA) mutant
is 1-5% of that seen in comR+ strains. Cloning and sequencing identified ComR as 
polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase). The PNPase amino acid sequence has 50%
identity and 67% similarity with the Escherichia coli enzyme. Enzymatic assays
show that this is the only PNPase activity in B. subtilis. comR (pnpA) is
necessary for comG-lacZ and comK-lacZ expression, but this requirement is
bypassed by a mecA disruption. In B. subtilis, the loss of PNPase has little
effect on expression from a fusion of the srfA promoter directly to lacZ, but is 
necessary for normal expression from certain srfA-lacZ fusions that include
portions of the normal srfA transcript. When a srfA-lacZ translational fusion is 
tested in isogenic pnpA+ and pnpA derivatives of E. coli, lower expression is
seen in the pnpA mutant. Since expression from lacZ fusions to comA, sinR, and
mecA appeared similar in the B. subtilis pnpA and pnpA+ strains, the loss of
PNPase does not have a strong general effect on gene expression. These results
suggest that PNPase may be necessary for modification of the srfA transcript in
order to activate translation or stabilize the transcript, and that this may be
necessary for competence development. This is the first evidence of
post-transcriptional effects on the development of competence in B. subtilis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1996.380907.x 
PMID: 8825779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (acrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (acrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Apr 27;7:604. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604. eCollection
2016.

Regulation of the Two-Component Regulator CpxR on Aminoglycosides and β-lactams
Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Huang H(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan L(1), Pan Y(1), Gao Y(3), Ma C(1), Hu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University Zhengzhou,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural UniversityZhengzhou, China;
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Institute of Science and
TechnologyXinxiang, China.
(3)Animal Husbandry Bureau of Henan Province Zhengzhou, China.

The two-component signal transduction system CpxAR is especially widespread in
Gram-negative bacteria. It has been reported that CpxAR contributes to the
multidrug resistance (MDR) in Escherichia coli. CpxR is a response regulator in
the two-component CpxAR system. The aim of this study was to explore the role of 
cpxR in the MDR of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. The minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics commonly used in veterinary medicine
for strains JS (a multidrug-susceptible standard strain of S. enterica serovar
Typhimurium), JSΔcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR (*), JSΔcpxRΔacrB,
JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR, JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR (*), 9 S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
isolates (SH1-9), and SH1-9ΔcpxR were determined by the 2-fold broth
microdilution method. The relative mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW,
ompD, tolC, acrB, acrD, acrF, mdtA, marA, and soxS in strains JS, JSΔcpxR, and
JSΔcpxR/pcpxR were detected by real-time PCR. The results showed 2- to 4-fold
decreases in the MICs of amikacin (AMK), gentamycin (GEN), apramycin (APR),
neomycin (NEO), ceftriaxone (CRO), ceftiofur (CEF), and cefquinome (CEQ) for
strain JSΔcpxR, as compared to those for the parental strain JS. Likewise,
SH1-9ΔcpxR were found to have 2- to 8-fold reduction in resistance to the above
antibiotics, except for NEO, as compared to their parental strains SH1-9.
Furthermore, 2- to 4-fold further decreases in the MICs of AMK, GEN, APR, and CEF
for strain JSΔcpxRΔacrB were observed, as compared to those for strain JSΔacrB.
In addition, CpxR overproduction in strain JSΔcpxR led to significant decreases
in the mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW, ompD, tolC, acrB, marA, and
soxS, and significant increases in those of stm3031 and stm1530. Notably, after
all strains were induced simultaneously by GEN to the 15th passage at
subinhibitory concentrations, strain JSΔcpxR/pcpxR showed significant increases
in mRNA expression levels of the efflux pump acrD and mdtA genes, as compared to 
strain JSΔcpxR. Our results indicate that the two-component regulator CpxR
contributes to resistance of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium to aminoglycosides
and β-lactams by influencing the expression level of the MDR-related genes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604 
PMCID: PMC4846824
PMID: 27199934 


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (cusC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Apr;56(1):215-27.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli to external copper.

Yamamoto K(1), Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kinki University, Nakamachi 3327-204,
Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli upon exposure to external copper was
studied using DNA microarray and in vivo and in vitro transcription assays.
Transcription of three hitherto-identified copper-responsive genes, copA (copper 
efflux transporter), cueO (multicopper oxidase) and cusC (tripartite copper pump 
component) became maximum at 5 min after addition of copper sulphate, and
thereafter decreased to the preshift levels within 30 min. Microarray analysis at
5 min after addition of copper indicated that a total of at least 29 genes
including these three known genes were markedly and specifically affected (28
upregulated and one downregulated). Transcription of the divergent operons,
cusCFB and cusRS, was found to be activated by CusR, which bound to a CusR box
between the cusC and cusR promoters. Except for this site, the CusR box was not
identified in the entire E. coli genome. On the other hand, transcription of copA
and cueO was found to be activated by another copper-responsive factor CueR,
which bound to a conserved inverted repeat sequence, CueR box. A total of 197
CueR boxes were identified on the E. coli genome, including the CueR box
associated with the moa operon for molybdenum cofactor synthesis. At least 10
copper-induced genes were found to be under the control of CpxAR two-component
system, indicating that copper is one of the signals for activation of the CpxAR 
system. In addition, transcription of yedWV, a putative two-component system, was
activated by copper in CusR-dependent manner. Taken together we conclude that the
copper-responsive genes are organized into a hierarchy of the regulation network,
forming at least four regulons, i.e. CueR, CusR, CpxR and YedW regulons. These
copper-responsive regulons appear to sense and respond to different
concentrations of external copper.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04532.x 
PMID: 15773991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (ftsZ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 5;284(23):15369-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900490200. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

Escherichia coli K-12 Suppressor-free Mutants Lacking Early Glycosyltransferases 
and Late Acyltransferases: minimal lipopolysaccharide structure and induction of 
envelope stress response.

Klein G(1), Lindner B, Brabetz W, Brade H, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Leibniz-Center for Medicine and Biosciences,
Parkallee 22, D-23845 Borstel, Germany.

To elucidate the minimal lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structure needed for the
viability of Escherichia coli, suppressor-free strains lacking either the
3-deoxy-d-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid transferase waaA gene or derivatives of the
heptosyltransferase I waaC deletion with lack of one or all late acyltransferases
(lpxL/M/P) and/or various outer membrane biogenesis factors were constructed.
Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) and waaA mutants exhibited highly attenuated growth,
whereas simultaneous deletion of waaC and surA was lethal. Analyses of LPS of
suppressor-free waaA mutants grown at 21 degrees C, besides showing accumulation 
of free lipid IV(A) precursor, also revealed the presence of its pentaacylated
and hexaacylated derivatives, indicating in vivo late acylation can occur without
Kdo. In contrast, LPS of Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) strains showed primarily
Kdo(2)-lipid IV(A), indicating that these minimal LPS structures are sufficient
to support growth of E. coli under slow-growth conditions at 21/23 degrees C.
These lipid IV(A) derivatives could be modified biosynthetically by
phosphoethanolamine, but not by 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose, indicating export
defects of such minimal LPS. DeltawaaA and Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) exhibited
cell-division defects with a decrease in the levels of FtsZ and OMP-folding
factor PpiD. These mutations led to strong constitutive additive induction of
envelope responsive CpxR/A and sigma(E) signal transduction pathways. Delta(lpxL 
lpxM lpxP) mutant, with intact waaC, synthesized tetraacylated lipid A and
constitutively incorporated a third Kdo in growth medium inducing synthesis of
P-EtN and l-Ara4N. Overexpression of msbA restored growth of Delta(lpxL lpxM
lpxP) under fast-growing conditions, but only partially that of the Delta(waaC
lpxL lpxM lpxP) mutant. This suppression could be alleviated by overexpression of
certain mutant msbA alleles or the single-copy chromosomal MsbA-498V variant in
the vicinity of Walker-box II.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M900490200 
PMCID: PMC2708834
PMID: 19346244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jul;180(13):3486-90.

Aberrant cell division and random FtsZ ring positioning in Escherichia coli cpxA*
mutants.

Pogliano J(1), Dong JM, De Wulf P, Furlong D, Boyd D, Losick R, Pogliano K, Lin
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In Escherichia coli, certain mutations in the cpxA gene (encoding a sensor kinase
of a two-component signal transduction system) randomize the location of FtsZ
ring assembly and dramatically affect cell division. However, deletion of the
cpxRA operon, encoding the sensor kinase and its cognate regulator CpxR, has no
effect on division site biogenesis. It appears that certain mutant sensor kinases
(CpxA*) either exhibit hyperactivity on CpxR or extend their signalling activity 
to one or more noncognate response regulators involved in cell division.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.13.3486-3490.1998 
PMCID: PMC107311
PMID: 9642209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (tar)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2014 Feb;196(3):707-15. doi: 10.1128/JB.00938-13. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Repression of flagellar genes in exponential phase by CsgD and CpxR, two crucial 
modulators of Escherichia coli biofilm formation.

Dudin O(1), Geiselmann J, Ogasawara H, Ishihama A, Lacour S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Adaptation et Pathogénie des Micro-organismes, UMR5163, Institut
Jean Roget, Domaine de la Merci, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

Escherichia coli adapts its lifestyle to the variations of environmental growth
conditions, swapping between swimming motility or biofilm formation. The
stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS is an important regulator of this switch,
since it stimulates adhesion and represses flagellar biosynthesis. By measuring
the dynamics of gene expression, we show that RpoS inhibits the transcription of 
the flagellar sigma factor, FliA, in exponential growth phase. RpoS also
partially controls the expression of CsgD and CpxR, two transcription factors
important for bacterial adhesion. We demonstrate that these two regulators
repress the transcription of fliA, flgM, and tar and that this regulation is
dependent on the growth medium. CsgD binds to the flgM and fliA promoters around 
their -10 promoter element, strongly suggesting direct repression. We show that
CsgD and CpxR also affect the expression of other known modulators of cell
motility. We propose an updated structure of the regulatory network controlling
the choice between adhesion and motility.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00938-13 
PMCID: PMC3911157
PMID: 24272779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (ackA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Nov;104(22):9707-9718. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y. Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism to produce recombinant protein
in Escherichia coli.

Pandi K(1), Chauhan AS(1), Khan WH(1), Rathore AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India. asrathore@biotechcmz.com.

Phosphate is one of the major constituents in growth media. It closely regulates 
central carbon and energy metabolism. Biochemical reactions in central carbon
metabolism are known to be regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
enzymes. Phosphate scarcity can limit microbial productivity. However,
microorganisms are evolved to grow in phosphate starvation environments. This
study investigates the effect of phosphate-starved response (PSR) stimuli in
wild-type and recombinant Escherichia coli cells cultivated in two different
substrates, lactose, and glycerol. Phosphate-starved E. coli culture sustained
bacterial growth despite the metabolic burden that emanated from recombinant
protein expression albeit with altered dynamics of substrate utilisation.
Induction of lactose in phosphate-starved culture led to a 2-fold improvement in 
product titre of rSymlin and a 2.3-fold improvement in product titre of rLTNF as 
compared with phosphate-unlimited culture. The results obtained in the study are 
in agreement with the literature to infer that phosphate starvation or limitation
can slow down the microbial growth rate in order to produce recombinant proteins.
Further, under PSR conditions, gene expression analysis demonstrated that while
selected genes (gapdh, pykF, ppsA, icdA) in glycolysis and pentose phosphate
pathway (zwf, gnd, talB, tktA) were up-regulated, other genes in lactose (lacY,
lacA) and acetate (ackA, pta) pathway were down-regulated. We have demonstrated
that cra, crp, phoB, and phoR are involved in the regulation of central carbon
metabolism. We propose a novel cross-regulation between lactose metabolism and
phosphate starvation. UDP-galactose, a toxic metabolite that is known to cause
cell lysis, has been shown to be significantly reduced due to slow uptake of
lactose under PSR conditions. Therefore, E. coli employs a decoupling strategy by
limiting growth and redirecting metabolic resources to survive and produce
recombinant protein under phosphate starvation conditions. KEY POINTS: •
Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism, which results in less galactose
accumulation. • Phosphate starvation modulates metabolic flow of central carbon
metabolism. • Product titre improves by 2-fold due to phosphate starvation. • The
approach has been successfully applied to production of two different proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y 
PMID: 33001250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Mar 23;13(1):45. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45.

The metabolic potential of Escherichia coli BL21 in defined and rich medium.

Li Z, Nimtz M, Rinas U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124
Braunschweig, Germany. Ursula.Rinas@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: The proteome reflects the available cellular machinery to deal with
nutrients and environmental challenges. The most common E. coli strain BL21
growing in different, commonly employed media was evaluated using a detailed
quantitative proteome analysis.
RESULTS: The presence of preformed biomass precursor molecules in rich media such
as Luria Bertani supported rapid growth concomitant to acetate formation and
apparently unbalanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, e.g. high 
levels of lower glycolytic pathway enzymes as well as pyruvate dehydrogenase, and
low levels of TCA cycle and high levels of the acetate forming enzymes Pta and
AckA. The proteome of cells growing exponentially in glucose-supplemented mineral
salt medium was dominated by enzymes of amino acid synthesis pathways, contained 
more balanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, and a lower
portion of ribosomal and other translational proteins. Entry into stationary
phase led to a reconstruction of the bacterial proteome by increasing e.g. the
portion of proteins required for scavenging rare nutrients and general cell
protection. This proteomic reconstruction during entry into stationary phase was 
more noticeable in cells growing in rich medium as they have a greater reservoir 
of recyclable proteins from the translational machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: The proteomic comparison of cells growing exponentially in different
media reflected the antagonistic and competitive regulation of central metabolic 
pathways through the global transcriptional regulators Cra, Crp, and ArcA. For
example, the proteome of cells growing exponentially in rich medium was
consistent with a dominating role of phosphorylated ArcA most likely a result
from limitations in reoxidizing reduced quinones in the respiratory chain under
these growth conditions. The proteomic alterations of exponentially growing cells
into stationary phase cells were consistent with stringent-like and stationary
phase responses and a dominating control through DksA-ppGpp and RpoS.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45 
PMCID: PMC4021462
PMID: 24656150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 2003 Mar;149(Pt 3):715-728. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0.

Autoinducer 2 activity in Escherichia coli culture supernatants can be actively
reduced despite maintenance of an active synthase, LuxS.

Hardie KR(1)(2), Cooksley C(2), Green AD(1)(2), Winzer K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nottingham University, Nottingham NG7 2RD, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Infections and Immunity, Queen's Medical Centre, C-Floor, West
Block, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Production of the signalling molecule (autoinducer-2) synthesized by LuxS has
been proposed to be pivotal to a universal mechanism of inter-species bacterial
cell-cell communication (quorum sensing); however recently the function of LuxS
has been noted to be integral to central metabolism since it contributes to the
activated methyl cycle. This paper shows that when Helicobacter pylori LuxS is
overproduced in Escherichia coli, it forms cross-linkable multimers. These
multimers persist at comparable levels after 24 h of growth if glucose is omitted
from the growth medium; however, the levels of extracellular autoinducer-2
decline (Glucose Retention of AI-2 Levels: GRAIL). Glycerol, maltose, galactose, 
ribose and L-arabinose could substitute for glucose, but lactose, D-arabinose,
acetate, citrate and pyruvate could not. Mutations in (i). metabolic pathways
(glycolytic enzymes eno, pgk, pgm; galactose epimerase; the Pta-AckA pathway),
(ii). sugar transport (pts components, rbs operon, mgl, trg), and (iii).
regulators involved in conventional catabolic repression (crp, cya),
cAMP-independent catabolite repression (creC, fruR, rpoS,) the stringent response
(relA, spoT) and the global carbon storage regulator (csrA) did not prevent
GRAIL. Although the basis of GRAIL remains uncertain, it is clear that the
mechanism is distinct from conventional catabolite repression. Moreover, GRAIL is
not due to inactivation of the enzymic activity of LuxS, since in E. coli, LuxS
contained within stationary-phase cells grown in the absence of glucose maintains
its activity in vitro.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0 
PMID: 12634340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (cfa)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 15;11(1):6060. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-85161-1.

Characterization of the pathophysiological determinants of diarrheagenic
Escherichia coli infection using a challenge model in healthy adults.

van Hoffen E(1), Mercenier A(#)(2)(3), Vidal K(#)(2), Benyacoub J(2), Schloesser 
J(4), Kardinaal A(1), Lucas-van de Bos E(1), van Alen I(1), Roggero I(2),
Duintjer K(1)(5), Berendts A(1), Albers R(3), Kleerebezem M(5), Ten Bruggencate
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Health, NIZO, PO Box 20, 6710 BA, Ede, the
Netherlands.
(2)Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Gastrointestinal Health, Nestlé Research,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)NutriLeads, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Health, NIZO, PO Box 20, 6710 BA, Ede, the
Netherlands. Joyce.Schloesser@nizo.com.
(5)Host Microbe Interactomics Group, Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen
University and Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

An experimental human challenge model with an attenuated diarrheagenic
Escherichia coli (E. coli) strain has been used in food intervention studies
aimed to increase resistance to E. coli infection. This study was designed to
refine and expand this challenge model. In a double-blind study, healthy male
subjects were orally challenged with 1E10 or 5E10 colony-forming units (CFU) of
E. coli strain E1392/75-2A. Three weeks later, subjects were rechallenged with
1E10 CFU of E. coli. Before and after both challenges, clinical symptoms and
infection- and immune-related biomarkers were analyzed. Subset analysis was
performed on clinically high- and low-responders. Regardless of inoculation dose,
the first challenge induced clinical symptoms for 2-3 days. In blood,
neutrophils, CRP, CXCL10, and CFA/II-specific IgG were induced, and in feces
calprotectin and CFA/II-specific IgA. Despite clinical differences between high- 
and low-responders, infection and immune biomarkers did not differ. The first
inoculation induced protection at the second challenge, with a minor clinical
response, and no change in biomarkers. The refined study design resulted in a
larger dynamic range of symptoms, and identification of biomarkers induced by a
challenge with the attenuated E. coli strain E1392/75-2A, which is of value for
future intervention studies. Addition of a second inoculation allows to study the
protective response induced by a primary infection.Clinicaltrials.gov
registration: NCT02541695 (04/09/2015).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-85161-1 
PMCID: PMC7960709
PMID: 33723346 


2. J Bacteriol. 2005 Feb;187(3):980-90.

Functional interactions between the carbon and iron utilization regulators, Crp
and Fur, in Escherichia coli.

Zhang Z(1), Gosset G, Barabote R, Gonzalez CS, Cuevas WA, Saier MH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0116, USA.

In Escherichia coli, the ferric uptake regulator (Fur) controls expression of the
iron regulon in response to iron availability while the cyclic AMP receptor
protein (Crp) regulates expression of the carbon regulon in response to carbon
availability. We here identify genes subject to significant changes in expression
level in response to the loss of both Fur and Crp. Many iron transport genes and 
several carbon metabolic genes are subject to dual control, being repressed by
the loss of Crp and activated by the loss of Fur. However, the sodB gene,
encoding superoxide dismutase, and the aceBAK operon, encoding the glyoxalate
shunt enzymes, show the opposite responses, being activated by the loss of Crp
and repressed by the loss of Fur. Several other genes including the sdhA-D,
sucA-D, and fumA genes, encoding key constituents of the Krebs cycle, proved to
be repressed by the loss of both transcription factors. Finally, the loss of both
Crp and Fur activated a heterogeneous group of genes under sigmaS control
encoding, for example, the cyclopropane fatty acid synthase, Cfa, the glycogen
synthesis protein, GlgS, the 30S ribosomal protein, S22, and the mechanosensitive
channel protein, YggB. Many genes appeared to be regulated by the two
transcription factors in an apparently additive fashion, but apparent positive or
negative cooperativity characterized several putative Crp/Fur interactions.
Relevant published data were evaluated, putative Crp and Fur binding sites were
identified, and representative results were confirmed by real-time PCR. Molecular
explanations for some, but not all, of these effects are provided.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.3.980-990.2005 
PMCID: PMC545712
PMID: 15659676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (cpdA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2018 Mar;164(3):410-419. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000618. Epub 
2018 Feb 8.

cAMP-CRP acts as a key regulator for the viable but non-culturable state in
Escherichia coli.

Nosho K(1), Fukushima H(1), Asai T(1), Nishio M(1), Takamaru R(1),
Kobayashi-Kirschvink KJ(2), Ogawa T(1), Hidaka M(1), Masaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Basic Science, The University of Tokyo, Komaba, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

A variety of bacteria, including Escherichia coli, are known to enter the viable 
but non-culturable (VBNC) state under various stress conditions. During this
state, cells lose colony-forming activities on conventional agar plates while
retaining signs of viability. Diverse environmental stresses including starvation
induce the VBNC state. However, little is known about the genetic mechanism
inducing this state. Here, we aimed to reveal the genetic determinants of the
VBNC state of E. coli. We hypothesized that the VBNC state is a process wherein
specific gene products important for colony formation are depleted during the
extended period of stress conditions. If so, higher expression of these genes
would maintain colony-forming activities, thereby restraining cells from entering
the VBNC state. From an E. coli plasmid-encoded ORF library, we identified genes 
that were responsible for maintaining high colony-forming activities after
exposure to starvation condition. Among these, cpdA encoding cAMP
phosphodiesterase exhibited higher performance in the maintenance of
colony-forming activities. As cpdA overexpression decreases intracellular cAMP,
cAMP or its complex with cAMP-receptor protein (CRP) may negatively regulate
colony-forming activities under stress conditions. We confirmed this using
deletion mutants lacking adenylate cyclase or CRP. These mutants fully maintained
colony-forming activities even after a long period of starvation, while wild-type
cells lost most of this activity. Thus, we concluded that the lack of cAMP-CRP
effectively retains high colony-forming activities, indicating that cAMP-CRP acts
as a positive regulator necessary for the induction of the VBNC state in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000618 
PMID: 29458560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 14;6:24449. doi: 10.1038/srep24449.

Reduced expression of cytochrome oxidases largely explains cAMP inhibition of
aerobic growth in Shewanella oneidensis.

Yin J(1), Meng Q(1), Fu H(1), Gao H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Agro-Microbial Research and Utilization, Zhejiang Province 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.

Inhibition of bacterial growth under aerobic conditions by elevated levels of
cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP), first revealed more than 50 years
ago, was attributed to accumulation of toxic methylglyoxal (MG). Here, we report 
a Crp-dependent mechanism rather than MG accumulation that accounts for the
phenotype in Shewanella oneidensis, an emerging research model for the bacterial 
physiology. We show that a similar phenotype can be obtained by removing CpdA, a 
cAMP phosphodiesterase that appears more effective than its Escherichia coli
counterpart. Although production of heme c and cytochromes c is correlated well
with cAMP levels, neither is sufficient for the retarded growth. Quantities of
overall cytochromes c increased substantially in the presence of elevated cAMP, a
phenomenon resembling cells respiring on non-oxygen electron acceptors. In
contrast, transcription of Crp-dependent genes encoding both cytochromes bd and
cbb3 oxidases is substantially repressed under the same condition. Overall, our
results suggest that cAMP of elevated levels drives cells into a low-energetic
status, under which aerobic respiration is inhibited.

DOI: 10.1038/srep24449 
PMCID: PMC4830989
PMID: 27076065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 2014 Sep;160(Pt 9):2079-2088. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.080705-0. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

A cAMP-independent carbohydrate-driven mechanism inhibits tnaA expression and
TnaA enzyme activity in Escherichia coli.

Li G(1), Young KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205-7199, USA.

When Escherichia coli is grown in a medium lacking glucose or another preferred
carbohydrate, the concentration of cAMP-cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP)
increases, and this latter complex regulates the expression of more than 180
genes. To respond rapidly to changes in carbohydrate availability, E. coli must
maintain a suitable intracellular concentration of cAMP by either exporting or
degrading excess cAMP. Currently, cAMP export via the TolC protein is thought to 
be more efficient at reducing these levels than is CpdA-mediated degradation of
cAMP. Here, we compared the contributions of TolC and CpdA by measuring the
expression of cAMP-regulated genes that encode tryptophanase (TnaA) and
β-galactosidase. In the presence of exogenous cAMP, a tolC mutant produced
intermediate levels of these enzymes, suggesting that cAMP levels were held in
check by CpdA. Conversely, a cpdA mutant produced much higher amounts of these
enzymes, indicating that CpdA was more efficient than TolC at reducing cAMP
levels. Surprisingly, expression of the tnaA gene halted rapidly when glucose was
added to cells lacking both TolC and CpdA, even though under these conditions
cAMP could not be removed by either pathway and tnaA expression should have
remained high. This result suggests the existence of an additional mechanism that
eliminates intracellular cAMP or terminates expression of some cAMP-CRP-regulated
genes. In addition, adding glucose and other carbohydrates rapidly inhibited the 
function of pre-formed TnaA, indicating that TnaA is regulated by a previously
unknown carbohydrate-dependent post-translational mechanism.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.080705-0 
PMID: 25061041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jan;78(2):411-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

Indole production promotes Escherichia coli mixed-culture growth with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by inhibiting quorum signaling.

Chu W(1), Zere TR, Weber MM, Wood TK, Whiteley M, Hidalgo-Romano B, Valenzuela E 
Jr, McLean RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Science and Technology, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

Indole production by Escherichia coli, discovered in the early 20th century, has 
been used as a diagnostic marker for distinguishing E. coli from other enteric
bacteria. By using transcriptional profiling and competition studies with defined
mutants, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP)-regulated indole formation is a major
factor that enables E. coli growth in mixed biofilm and planktonic populations
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mutants deficient in cAMP production (cyaA) or the
cAMP receptor gene (crp), as well as indole production (tnaA), were not
competitive in coculture with P. aeruginosa but could be restored to wild-type
competitiveness by supplementation with a physiologically relevant indole
concentration. E. coli sdiA mutants, which lacked the receptor for both indole
and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs), showed no change in competitive fitness,
suggesting that indole acted directly on P. aeruginosa. An E. coli tnaA mutant
strain regained wild-type competiveness if grown with P. aeruginosa AHL synthase 
(rhlI and rhlI lasI) mutants. In contrast to the wild type, P. aeruginosa AHL
synthase mutants were unable to degrade indole. Indole produced during
mixed-culture growth inhibited pyocyanin production and other AHL-regulated
virulence factors in P. aeruginosa. Mixed-culture growth with P. aeruginosa
stimulated indole formation in E. coli cpdA, which is unable to regulate cAMP
levels, suggesting the potential for mixed-culture gene activation via cAMP.
These findings illustrate how indole, an early described feature of E. coli
central metabolism, can play a significant role in mixed-culture survival by
inhibiting quorum-regulated competition factors in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11 
PMCID: PMC3255741
PMID: 22101045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Bacteriol. 2011 Mar;193(5):1086-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.01399-10. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Escherichia coli exports cyclic AMP via TolC.

Hantke K(1), Winkler K, Schultz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazeutische Biochemie, Pharmazeutisches Institut, Universität Tübingen,
Auf der Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. hantke@uni-tuebingen.de

Retraction in
    Hantke K, Winkler K, Schultz JE. J Bacteriol. 2015 Dec 15;197(24):3849.

In Escherichia coli more than 180 genes are regulated by the cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-cAMP receptor protein (CRP) complex. However, more than 90% of cAMP that
is made by intracellular adenylyl cyclases is found in the culture medium. How is
cAMP exported from E. coli? In a tolC mutant, 0.03 mM IPTG
(isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside) was sufficient to induce β-galactosidase
compared to 0.1 mM IPTG in the parent strain. In a cya mutant unable to produce
cAMP about 1 mM extracellular cAMP was required to induce β-galactosidase,
whereas in a cya tolC mutant 0.1 mM cAMP was sufficient. When cAMP in E. coli cya
was generated intracellularly by a recombinant, weakly active adenylyl cyclase
from Corynebacterium glutamicum, the critical level of cAMP necessary for
induction of maltose degradation was only achieved in a tolC mutant and not in
the parent strain. Deletion of a putative cAMP phosphodiesterase of E. coli,
CpdA, resulted in a slightly similar, yet more diffuse phenotype. The data
demonstrate that export of cAMP via TolC is a most efficient way of E. coli to
lower high concentrations of cAMP in the cell and maintain its sensitivity in
changing metabolic environments.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01399-10 
PMCID: PMC3067598
PMID: 21183666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Res Microbiol. 2010 Mar;161(2):158-67. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.12.004. Epub
2010 Jan 4.

Cyclic AMP negatively regulates prodigiosin production by Serratia marcescens.

Kalivoda EJ(1), Stella NA, Aston MA, Fender JE, Thompson PP, Kowalski RP, Shanks 
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Charles T. Campbell Laboratory of Ophthalmic Microbiology, Department of
Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh Eye Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Many Serratia marcescens strains produce the red pigment prodigiosin, which has
antimicrobial and anti-tumor properties. Previous reports suggest that cyclic AMP
(cAMP) is a positive regulator of prodigiosin production. Supporting this model, 
the addition of glucose to growth medium inhibited pigment production in rich and
minimal media. Unexpectedly, we observed highly elevated levels of prodigiosin
production in isogenic strains with mutations in genes involved in cAMP
production (cyaA and crr) and in cAMP-dependent transcriptional signaling (crp). 
Multicopy expression of the Escherichia coli cAMP-phosphodiesterase gene, cpdA,
also conferred a striking increase in prodigiosin production. Exogenous cAMP
decreased both pigment production and pigA-lacZ transcription in the wild-type
(WT) strain, and pigA-lacZ transcription was significantly increased in a crp
mutant relative to WT. Suppressor and epistasis analysis indicate that the
hyperpigment phenotype was dependent upon pigment biosynthetic genes (pigA, pigB,
pigC, pigD and pigM). These experiments establish cAMP as a negative regulator of
prodigiosin production in S. marcescens.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.12.004 
PMCID: PMC2846241
PMID: 20045458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2009 May;155(Pt 5):1680-1689. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.026021-0. Epub 2009 Apr 16.

Interplay of cellular cAMP levels, {sigma}S activity and oxidative stress
resistance in Escherichia coli.

Barth E(1), Gora KV(2), Gebendorfer KM(3)(1), Settele F(2), Jakob U(2), Winter
J(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Biotechnologie, Technische Universität München,
Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.
(3)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CiPSM), 81377 Munich, Germany.

Hypochlorous acid (HOCl), the active ingredient of household bleach, functions as
a powerful antimicrobial that is used not only in numerous industrial
applications but also in mammalian host defence. Here we show that multicopy
expression of cpdA, encoding the cAMP phosphodiesterase, leads to a dramatically 
increased resistance of Escherichia coli to HOCl stress as well as to the
unrelated hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) stress. This general oxidative stress
resistance is apparently caused by the CpdA-mediated decrease in cellular cAMP
levels, which leads to the partial inactivation of the global transcriptional
regulator cAMP receptor protein (CRP). Downregulation of CRP in turn causes the
derepression of rpoS, encoding the alternative sigma factor sigma(S), which
activates the general stress response in E. coli. We found that these highly
oxidative stress-resistant cells have a substantially increased capacity to
combat HOCl-mediated insults and to degrade reactive oxygen species. Mutational
analysis revealed that the DNA-protecting protein Dps, the catalase KatE, and the
exonuclease III XthA play the predominant roles in conferring the high resistance
of rpoS-overexpressing strains towards HOCl and H(2)O(2) stress. Our results
demonstrate the close regulatory interplay between cellular cAMP levels, sigma(S)
activity and oxidative stress resistance in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.026021-0 
PMCID: PMC2848814
PMID: 19372151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (csiD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Feb;51(3):799-811.

Multiple stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex sigma
S-dependent csiD-ygaF-gabDTP operon in Escherichia coli.

Metzner M(1), Germer J, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The csiD-ygaF-gabDTP region in the Escherichia coli genome represents a cluster
of sigma S-controlled genes. Here, we investigated promoter structures, sigma
factor dependencies, potential co-regulation and environmental regulatory
patterns for all of these genes. We find that this region constitutes a complex
operon with expression being controlled by three differentially regulated
promoters: (i) csiDp, which affects the expression of all five genes, is
cAMP-CRP/sigma S-dependent and activated exclusively upon carbon starvation and
stationary phase; (ii) gabDp1, which is sigma S-dependent and exhibits multiple
stress induction like sigma S itself; and (iii) gabDp2[previously suggested by
Schneider, B.L., Ruback, S., Kiupakis, A.K., Kasbarian, H., Pybus, C., and
Reitzer, L. (2002) J. Bacteriol. 184: 6976-6986], which appears to be Nac/sigma
70-controlled and to respond to poor nitrogen sources. In addition, we identify a
novel repressor, CsiR, which modulates csiDp activity in a temporal manner during
early stationary phase. Finally, we propose a physiological role for sigma
S-controlled GabT/D-mediated gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) catabolism and glutamate 
accumulation in general stress adaptation. This physiological role is reflected
by the activation of the operon-internal gabDp1 promoter under the different
conditions that also induce sigma S, which include shifts to acidic pH or high
osmolarity as well as starvation or stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03867.x 
PMID: 14731280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Aug;41(3):705-16.

Role of activator site position and a distal UP-element half-site for sigma
factor selectivity at a CRP/H-NS-activated sigma(s)-dependent promoter in
Escherichia coli.

Germer J(1), Becker G, Metzner M, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin,
Königin-Luise-Str. 12-16, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription initiation by the stress-associated sigma(S)-containing RNA
polymerase holoenzyme (E sigma(S)) in Escherichia coli is often subject to
complex regulation that involves multiple additional regulators and histone-like 
proteins. csiD is a stationary phase-inducible sigma(S)-dependent gene in E. coli
that requires activation by cAMP-CRP (bound to a site centred at -68.5
nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional start site) and is positively
modulated by the abundant nucleoid-associated proteins H-NS and Lrp. By shifting 
the CRP box to positions between -80.5 and -60.5, we could demonstrate that: (i) 
activation is equally helix phase dependent as at classic class I promoters; (ii)
E sigma(S) prefers a CRP box location at -68.5/-70.5, whereas E sigma(70) is
nearly inactive with such an arrangement; and (iii) with the CRP site moved to
-60.5, transcription can be initiated efficiently by both holoenzymes. The csiD
promoter region also contains a distal UP-element half-site located downstream of
the CRP box, as demonstrated by mutational studies, in which this element was
either eliminated or completed to a full UP-element. The UP-element half-site
favours E sigma(S)-mediated expression, whereas with the full UP-element, nearly 
wild-type levels of csiD transcription were observed in the absence of sigma(S). 
Finally, we show that the two histone-like proteins, H-NS and Lrp, both act by
influencing activation by cAMP-CRP, but do so by different mechanisms. In
particular, H-NS directly or indirectly increases positional stringency for the
CRP binding site. The implications of these findings with respect to sigma factor
selectivity, activation mechanisms used by the two holoenzymes and the
architecture of sigma(S)-dependent promoters are discussed.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02548.x 
PMID: 11532138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Biol. 1998 Feb 20;276(2):339-53.

Molecular analysis of the regulation of csiD, a carbon starvation-inducible gene 
in Escherichia coli that is exclusively dependent on sigma s and requires
activation by cAMP-CRP.

Marschall C(1), Labrousse V, Kreimer M, Weichart D, Kolb A, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany.

The general stress-induced sigma subunit sigma s of Escherichia coli RNA
polymerase is closely related to the vegetative sigma factor sigma 70. In view of
their very similar promoter specificity in vitro, it is unclear how sigma factor 
selectivity in the expression of sigma s-dependent genes is generated in vivo.
The csiD gene is such a strongly sigma s-dependent gene. In contrast to sigma s, 
which is induced in response to many different stresses, csiD, whose expression
is driven from a single promoter, is induced by carbon starvation only. To our
knowledge, the csiD promoter is the first characterized promoter which is not
only exclusively dependent on sigma s-containing RNA polymerase (E sigma s), but 
also requires an activator, cAMP-CRP. In addition, leucine-responsive regulatory 
protein (Lrp) acts as a positive modulator of csiD expression. Also in vitro, E
sigma s is more efficient than E sigma 70 in csiD promoter binding, open complex 
formation and run-off transcription, which might be due to the poor match of the 
csiD -35 region to the sigma 70 consensus and to transcription by E sigma s being
less dependent on contacts in this region. By DNase I protection experiments, a
cAMP-CRP binding site centered at -68.5 nucleotides upstream of the csiD
transcriptional start site was identified. While cAMP-CRP stimulates E sigma 70
binding, it does not promote open complex formation by E sigma 70, but does so in
conjunction with E sigma s. With linear templates, cAMP-CRP significantly
stimulates E sigma s-mediated in vitro transcription, whereas transcription by E 
sigma 70 is negligible and hardly stimulated by cAMP-CRP. These findings may
reflect different or less stringent positional requirements for an activator site
for E sigma s than for E sigma 70, and indicate that cAMP-CRP contributes to
sigma factor selectivity at the csiD promoter. In vitro transcription experiments
with super-coiled templates, however, revealed significant cAMP-CRP-stimulated
transcription also by E sigma 70. Yet, under these conditions, H-NS was found to 
restore E sigma s specificity by strongly interfering with cAMP-CRP/E sigma
70-dependent transcription. Lrp strongly and cooperatively binds to multiple
sites located between positions -14 and -102 (in a way that suggests DNA wrapping
around multiple Lrp molecules) and moderately stimulates in vitro transcription, 
especially with E sigma s. In summary, we conclude that the csiD promoter has an 
intrinsic preference for E sigma s, but that also protein factors such as
cAMP-CRP, Lrp and probably H-NS as well as DNA conformation contribute to its
strong E sigma s selectivity. Furthermore, this strong E sigma s preference in
combination with a requirement for high concentrations of the essential activator
cAMP-CRP ensures csiD expression under conditions of carbon starvation, but not
other stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1533 
PMID: 9512707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (frdA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochem J. 1984 Sep 1;222(2):519-34.

Nucleotide sequence encoding the flavoprotein and hydrophobic subunits of the
succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli.

Wood D, Darlison MG, Wilde RJ, Guest JR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 3614 base-pair segment of DNA containing the sdhA
gene, encoding the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia
coli, and two genes sdhC and sdhD, encoding small hydrophobic subunits, has been 
determined. Together with the iron-sulphur protein gene (sdhB) these genes form
an operon (sdhCDAB) situated between the citrate synthase gene (gltA) and the
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex genes (sucAB): gltA-sdhCDAB-sucAB.
Transcription of the gltA and sdhCDAB gene appears to diverge from a single
intergenic region that contains two pairs of potential promoter sequences and two
putative CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein)-binding sites. The sdhA structural
gene comprises 1761 base-pairs (587 codons, excluding the initiation codon, AUG) 
and it encodes a polypeptide of Mr 64268 that is strikingly homologous with the
flavoprotein subunit of fumarate reductase (frdA gene product). The FAD-binding
region, including the histidine residue at the FAD-attachment site, has been
identified by its homology with other flavoproteins and with the flavopeptide of 
the bovine heart mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase. Potential active-site
cysteine and histidine residues have also been indicated by the comparisons. The 
sdhC (384 base-pairs) and sdhD (342 base-pairs) structural genes encode two
strongly hydrophobic proteins of Mr 14167 and 12792 respectively. These proteins 
resemble in size and composition, but not sequence, the membrane anchor proteins 
of fumarate reductase (the frdC and frdD gene products).

DOI: 10.1042/bj2220519 
PMCID: PMC1144207
PMID: 6383359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (frdC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochem J. 1984 Sep 1;222(2):519-34.

Nucleotide sequence encoding the flavoprotein and hydrophobic subunits of the
succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli.

Wood D, Darlison MG, Wilde RJ, Guest JR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 3614 base-pair segment of DNA containing the sdhA
gene, encoding the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia
coli, and two genes sdhC and sdhD, encoding small hydrophobic subunits, has been 
determined. Together with the iron-sulphur protein gene (sdhB) these genes form
an operon (sdhCDAB) situated between the citrate synthase gene (gltA) and the
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex genes (sucAB): gltA-sdhCDAB-sucAB.
Transcription of the gltA and sdhCDAB gene appears to diverge from a single
intergenic region that contains two pairs of potential promoter sequences and two
putative CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein)-binding sites. The sdhA structural
gene comprises 1761 base-pairs (587 codons, excluding the initiation codon, AUG) 
and it encodes a polypeptide of Mr 64268 that is strikingly homologous with the
flavoprotein subunit of fumarate reductase (frdA gene product). The FAD-binding
region, including the histidine residue at the FAD-attachment site, has been
identified by its homology with other flavoproteins and with the flavopeptide of 
the bovine heart mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase. Potential active-site
cysteine and histidine residues have also been indicated by the comparisons. The 
sdhC (384 base-pairs) and sdhD (342 base-pairs) structural genes encode two
strongly hydrophobic proteins of Mr 14167 and 12792 respectively. These proteins 
resemble in size and composition, but not sequence, the membrane anchor proteins 
of fumarate reductase (the frdC and frdD gene products).

DOI: 10.1042/bj2220519 
PMCID: PMC1144207
PMID: 6383359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (glnD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microb Cell Fact. 2010 Jan 27;9:8. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-9-8.

Metabolic regulation of Escherichia coli and its gdhA, glnL, gltB, D mutants
under different carbon and nitrogen limitations in the continuous culture.

Kumar R(1), Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Iizuka, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It is quite important to understand how the central metabolism is
regulated under nitrogen (N)- limitation as well as carbon (C)- limitation. In
particular, the effect of C/N ratio on the metabolism is of practical interest
for the heterologous protein production, PHB production, etc. Although the carbon
and nitrogen metabolisms are interconnected and the overall mechanism is
complicated, it is strongly desirable to clarify the effects of culture
environment on the metabolism from the practical application point of view.
RESULTS: The effect of C/N ratio on the metabolism in Escherichia coli was
investigated in the aerobic continuous culture at the dilution rate of 0.2 h-1
based on fermentation data, transcriptional RNA level, and enzyme activity data. 
The glucose concentration was kept at 10 g/l, while ammonium sulfate
concentration was varied from 5.94 to 0.594 g/l. The resultant C/N ratios were
1.68 (100%), 2.81(60%), 4.21(40%), 8.42(20%), and 16.84(10%), where the
percentage values in brackets indicate the ratio of N- concentration as compared 
to the case of 5.94 g/l of ammonium sulfate. The mRNA levels of crp and mlc
decreased, which caused ptsG transcript expression to be up-regulated as C/N
ratio increased. As C/N ratio increased cra transcript expression decreased,
which caused ptsH, pfkA, and pykF to be up-regulated. At high C/N ratio,
transcriptional mRNA level of soxR/S increased, which may be due to the activated
respiratory chain as indicated by up-regulations of such genes as cyoA, cydB, ndh
as well as the increase in the specific CO2 production rate. The rpoN transcript 
expression increased with the increase in C/N ratio, which led glnA, L, G and
gltD transcript expression to change in similar fashion. The nac transcript
expression showed similar trend as rpoN, while gdhA transcript expression changed
in reverse direction. The transcriptional mRNA level of glnB, which codes for
PII, glnD and glnK increased as C/N ratio increases. It was shown that GS-GOGAT
pathway was activated for gdhA mutant under N- rich condition. In the case of
glnL mutant, GOGAT enzyme activity was reduced as compared to the wild type under
N- limitation. In the case of gltB, D mutants, GDH and GS enzymes were utilized
under both N- rich and N- limited conditions. In this case, the transcriptional
mRNA level of gdhA and corresponding GDH enzyme activity was higher under N-
limitation as compared to N- rich condition.
CONCLUSION: The metabolic regulation of E.coli was clarified under both carbon
(C)- limitation and nitrogen (N)- limitation based on fermentation,
transcriptional mRNA level and enzyme activities. The overall regulation
mechanism was proposed. The effects of knocking out N- assimilation pathway genes
were also clarified.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-9-8 
PMCID: PMC2827463
PMID: 20105320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (pta)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Nov;104(22):9707-9718. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y. Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism to produce recombinant protein
in Escherichia coli.

Pandi K(1), Chauhan AS(1), Khan WH(1), Rathore AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India. asrathore@biotechcmz.com.

Phosphate is one of the major constituents in growth media. It closely regulates 
central carbon and energy metabolism. Biochemical reactions in central carbon
metabolism are known to be regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
enzymes. Phosphate scarcity can limit microbial productivity. However,
microorganisms are evolved to grow in phosphate starvation environments. This
study investigates the effect of phosphate-starved response (PSR) stimuli in
wild-type and recombinant Escherichia coli cells cultivated in two different
substrates, lactose, and glycerol. Phosphate-starved E. coli culture sustained
bacterial growth despite the metabolic burden that emanated from recombinant
protein expression albeit with altered dynamics of substrate utilisation.
Induction of lactose in phosphate-starved culture led to a 2-fold improvement in 
product titre of rSymlin and a 2.3-fold improvement in product titre of rLTNF as 
compared with phosphate-unlimited culture. The results obtained in the study are 
in agreement with the literature to infer that phosphate starvation or limitation
can slow down the microbial growth rate in order to produce recombinant proteins.
Further, under PSR conditions, gene expression analysis demonstrated that while
selected genes (gapdh, pykF, ppsA, icdA) in glycolysis and pentose phosphate
pathway (zwf, gnd, talB, tktA) were up-regulated, other genes in lactose (lacY,
lacA) and acetate (ackA, pta) pathway were down-regulated. We have demonstrated
that cra, crp, phoB, and phoR are involved in the regulation of central carbon
metabolism. We propose a novel cross-regulation between lactose metabolism and
phosphate starvation. UDP-galactose, a toxic metabolite that is known to cause
cell lysis, has been shown to be significantly reduced due to slow uptake of
lactose under PSR conditions. Therefore, E. coli employs a decoupling strategy by
limiting growth and redirecting metabolic resources to survive and produce
recombinant protein under phosphate starvation conditions. KEY POINTS: •
Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism, which results in less galactose
accumulation. • Phosphate starvation modulates metabolic flow of central carbon
metabolism. • Product titre improves by 2-fold due to phosphate starvation. • The
approach has been successfully applied to production of two different proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y 
PMID: 33001250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Mar 23;13(1):45. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45.

The metabolic potential of Escherichia coli BL21 in defined and rich medium.

Li Z, Nimtz M, Rinas U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124
Braunschweig, Germany. Ursula.Rinas@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: The proteome reflects the available cellular machinery to deal with
nutrients and environmental challenges. The most common E. coli strain BL21
growing in different, commonly employed media was evaluated using a detailed
quantitative proteome analysis.
RESULTS: The presence of preformed biomass precursor molecules in rich media such
as Luria Bertani supported rapid growth concomitant to acetate formation and
apparently unbalanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, e.g. high 
levels of lower glycolytic pathway enzymes as well as pyruvate dehydrogenase, and
low levels of TCA cycle and high levels of the acetate forming enzymes Pta and
AckA. The proteome of cells growing exponentially in glucose-supplemented mineral
salt medium was dominated by enzymes of amino acid synthesis pathways, contained 
more balanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, and a lower
portion of ribosomal and other translational proteins. Entry into stationary
phase led to a reconstruction of the bacterial proteome by increasing e.g. the
portion of proteins required for scavenging rare nutrients and general cell
protection. This proteomic reconstruction during entry into stationary phase was 
more noticeable in cells growing in rich medium as they have a greater reservoir 
of recyclable proteins from the translational machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: The proteomic comparison of cells growing exponentially in different
media reflected the antagonistic and competitive regulation of central metabolic 
pathways through the global transcriptional regulators Cra, Crp, and ArcA. For
example, the proteome of cells growing exponentially in rich medium was
consistent with a dominating role of phosphorylated ArcA most likely a result
from limitations in reoxidizing reduced quinones in the respiratory chain under
these growth conditions. The proteomic alterations of exponentially growing cells
into stationary phase cells were consistent with stringent-like and stationary
phase responses and a dominating control through DksA-ppGpp and RpoS.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45 
PMCID: PMC4021462
PMID: 24656150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biotechnol. 2013 Oct 20;168(2):155-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.06.023. Epub
2013 Jul 10.

Catabolite regulation analysis of Escherichia coli for acetate overflow mechanism
and co-consumption of multiple sugars based on systems biology approach using
computer simulation.

Matsuoka Y(1), Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Iizuka, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan.

It is quite important to understand the basic principle embedded in the main
metabolism for the interpretation of the fermentation data. For this, it may be
useful to understand the regulation mechanism based on systems biology approach. 
In the present study, we considered the perturbation analysis together with
computer simulation based on the models which include the effects of global
regulators on the pathway activation for the main metabolism of Escherichia coli.
Main focus is the acetate overflow metabolism and the co-fermentation of multiple
carbon sources. The perturbation analysis was first made to understand the nature
of the feed-forward loop formed by the activation of Pyk by FDP (F1,6BP), and the
feed-back loop formed by the inhibition of Pfk by PEP in the glycolysis. Those
together with the effect of transcription factor Cra caused by FDP level affected
the glycolysis activity. The PTS (phosphotransferase system) acts as the
feed-back system by repressing the glucose uptake rate for the increase in the
glucose uptake rate. It was also shown that the increased PTS flux (or glucose
consumption rate) causes PEP/PYR ratio to be decreased, and EIIA-P, Cya, cAMP-Crp
decreased, where cAMP-Crp in turn repressed TCA cycle and more acetate is formed.
This was further verified by the detailed computer simulation. In the case of
multiple carbon sources such as glucose and xylose, it was shown that the
sequential utilization of carbon sources was observed for wild type, while the
co-consumption of multiple carbon sources with slow consumption rates were
observed for the ptsG mutant by computer simulation, and this was verified by
experiments. Moreover, the effect of a specific gene knockout such as Δpyk on the
metabolic characteristics was also investigated based on the computer simulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.06.023 
PMID: 23850830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiology (Reading). 2003 Mar;149(Pt 3):715-728. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0.

Autoinducer 2 activity in Escherichia coli culture supernatants can be actively
reduced despite maintenance of an active synthase, LuxS.

Hardie KR(1)(2), Cooksley C(2), Green AD(1)(2), Winzer K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nottingham University, Nottingham NG7 2RD, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Infections and Immunity, Queen's Medical Centre, C-Floor, West
Block, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Production of the signalling molecule (autoinducer-2) synthesized by LuxS has
been proposed to be pivotal to a universal mechanism of inter-species bacterial
cell-cell communication (quorum sensing); however recently the function of LuxS
has been noted to be integral to central metabolism since it contributes to the
activated methyl cycle. This paper shows that when Helicobacter pylori LuxS is
overproduced in Escherichia coli, it forms cross-linkable multimers. These
multimers persist at comparable levels after 24 h of growth if glucose is omitted
from the growth medium; however, the levels of extracellular autoinducer-2
decline (Glucose Retention of AI-2 Levels: GRAIL). Glycerol, maltose, galactose, 
ribose and L-arabinose could substitute for glucose, but lactose, D-arabinose,
acetate, citrate and pyruvate could not. Mutations in (i). metabolic pathways
(glycolytic enzymes eno, pgk, pgm; galactose epimerase; the Pta-AckA pathway),
(ii). sugar transport (pts components, rbs operon, mgl, trg), and (iii).
regulators involved in conventional catabolic repression (crp, cya),
cAMP-independent catabolite repression (creC, fruR, rpoS,) the stringent response
(relA, spoT) and the global carbon storage regulator (csrA) did not prevent
GRAIL. Although the basis of GRAIL remains uncertain, it is clear that the
mechanism is distinct from conventional catabolite repression. Moreover, GRAIL is
not due to inactivation of the enzymic activity of LuxS, since in E. coli, LuxS
contained within stationary-phase cells grown in the absence of glucose maintains
its activity in vitro.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0 
PMID: 12634340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (purE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):672-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302770. Epub 2013
Dec 12.

Infusion of pharmaceutical-grade natural human C-reactive protein is not
proinflammatory in healthy adult human volunteers.

Lane T(1), Wassef N, Poole S, Mistry Y, Lachmann HJ, Gillmore JD, Hawkins PN,
Pepys MB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit, and the National Amyloidosis Centre,
Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Division of Medicine, University
College London, London, United Kingdom (M.B.P., T.L., H.J.L., J.D.G., P.N.H.);
Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom 
(N.W.); and the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Potters 
Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom (S.P., Y.M.).

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):594-5.
    Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):596-7.

RATIONALE: Baseline circulating concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) are
significantly associated with cardiovascular disease risk in general populations.
This modest association has been inappropriately conflated with causality, and it
has been claimed that CRP is proatherogenic. Most of the known causative factors 
for atherosclerosis stimulate increased CRP production, but comprehensive genetic
epidemiology studies provide no support for a pathogenic role of CRP. The
reported proinflammatory effects of human CRP preparations on healthy cells in
vitro and in healthy animals in vivo have all been produced by poorly
characterized CRP preparations, demonstrably caused by impurities, or elicited by
CRP made in recombinant Escherichia coli not by humans. None of the in vitro or
animal findings have been reproduced with pure natural human CRP. Nevertheless,
the strong proinflammatory effects of infusing recombinant bacterial CRP into
humans have still been inappropriately ascribed to CRP.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of infusion into healthy adult human
volunteers of pure natural human CRP.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Comprehensively characterized, pharmaceutical-grade,
endotoxin-free, purified CRP, prepared to GMP standard from pooled normal human
donor plasma was infused as an intravenous bolus in 7 healthy adult human
volunteers at ≤2 mg/kg to provide circulating CRP concentrations ≤44 mg/L. No
recipient showed any significant clinical, hematologic, coagulation, or
biochemical changes, or any increase in proinflammatory cytokines or acute phase 
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: The human CRP molecule itself is not proinflammatory in healthy
human adults.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302770 
PMID: 24337102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2010 Jul-Sep;53(3):494-7. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.68290.

Serum tumor necrosis factor alpha and C-reactive protein in pediatric patients
with sepsis and its correlation with microbiologic findings.

Kumar S(1), Rizvi M.

Author information: 
(1)Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, AMU, Aligarh, India.

OBJECTIVE: To study the association of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and
C--reactive protein (CRP) with microbiologically documented cases of sepsis
versus clinically documented cases of sepsis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy nine pediatric patients with sepsis were studied. 
Relevant specimens were processed for bacterial or fungal etiology. TNF-a was
detected by enzyme immunoassay and CRP was detected by latex agglutination.
Thirty healthy cases were included in the study to establish baseline TNF-alpha
levels.
RESULTS: Forty two (53.2%) patients had a microbiologically documented sepsis.
Among Gram negative bacilli Escherichia coli was the most common isolate followed
by Klebsiella spp. Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae
predominated among the Gram positive cocci. Patients with a positive culture had 
significantly higher TNF-alpha levels than patients with a negative culture (70
pg/ml vs. 33 pg/ml P < 0.01). Further, pure gram negative infection correlated
with significantly higher TNF-alpha levels than pure (P < 0.01) gram positive
infection. The CRP values did not highlight these differences significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: TNF-alpha level was significantly raised in patients with sepsis.
TNF-a levels were raised significantly in culture positive cases in general and
in Gram negative infections in particular. Serum TNF-alpha was a more sensitive
marker for different categories of sepsis compared to CRP and microbiology
culture.

DOI: 10.4103/0377-4929.68290 
PMID: 20699510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Circ Res. 2005 Nov 25;97(11):e97-103. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Proinflammatory effects of bacterial recombinant human C-reactive protein are
caused by contamination with bacterial products, not by C-reactive protein
itself.

Pepys MB(1), Hawkins PN, Kahan MC, Tennent GA, Gallimore JR, Graham D, Sabin CA, 
Zychlinsky A, de Diego J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Department of Medicine, Royal
Free and University College Medical School, London, UK. m.pepys@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2005 Dec 9;97(12):e115-6.

Intravenous administration to human volunteers of a commercial preparation of
recombinant human C-reactive protein (CRP) produced in Escherichia coli was
recently reported in this journal to induce an acute phase response of serum
amyloid A protein (SAA) and of CRP itself, and to activate the coagulation
system. The authors concluded that CRP is probably a mediator of atherothrombotic
disease. Here we confirm that this recombinant CRP preparation was
proinflammatory both for mouse macrophages in vitro and for mice in vivo, but
show that pure natural human CRP had no such activity. Furthermore mice
transgenic for human CRP, and expressing it throughout their lives, maintained
normal concentrations of their most sensitive endogenous acute phase reactants,
SAA and serum amyloid P component (SAP). The patterns of in vitro cytokine
induction and of in vivo acute phase stimulation by the recombinant CRP
preparation were consistent with contamination by bacterial products, and there
was 46.6 EU of apparent endotoxin activity per mg of CRP in the bacterial
product, compared with 0.9 EU per mg of our isolated natural human CRP
preparation. The absence of any proinflammatory activity in natural CRP for
macrophages or healthy mice strongly suggests that the in vivo effects of the
recombinant preparation observed in humans were attributable to proinflammatory
bacterial products and not human CRP.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000193595.03608.08 
PMCID: PMC1400607
PMID: 16254214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997 Oct;156(4 Pt 1):1157-64.

Dose-response relationship to inhaled endotoxin in normal subjects.

Michel O(1), Nagy AM, Schroeven M, Duchateau J, Nève J, Fondu P, Sergysels R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Allergology and Respiratory Diseases, Saint-Pierre University
Hospital (ULB), Brussels, Belgium. omichel@resulb.ulb.ac.be

Exposure to endotoxin and to its purified derivative lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is 
related to several occupational pulmonary diseases and to severe domestic asthma.
An inhalation of a given dose of pure LPS produces both a systemic and a
bronchial inflammatory response. Information on the dose-response relationship to
inhaled LPS in normal subjects is a prerequisite to define the safety threshold
of exposure. In the present study, the clinical and inflammatory responses to
rising doses of inhaled LPS was evaluated. Nine normal volunteers were challenged
weekly by inhalation with saline, 0.5, 5, and 50 microg LPS (Escherichia coli).
The response determinators are the clinical symptoms, fever, FEV1, blood
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) with their level of activation (measured by 
luminol enhanced-chemiluminescence), and both the blood and the urine
concentrations of the C-reactive protein (CRP). To assess the bronchial
inflammatory response, an induced sputum was obtained 6 h after each dose of LPS,
and the total and differential cell counts as well as the MPO, ECP, and TNF-alpha
concentrations were measured. Compared with the saline, an inhalation of 0.5
microg LPS induces a significant decrease in the PMN luminol-enhanced
chemiluminescence (p < 0.01), which could reflect a process of margination and/or
extravascular sequestration of activated PMN. Inhalation of 5 microg LPS is
associated with a significant rise in blood CRP (p < 0.01) and PMNs (p < 0.001)
and in sputum PMNs (p < 0.05), monocytes (p < 0.05), and MPO (p < 0.05).
Inhalation of 50 microg LPS was characterized by a significant increase in
temperature (p < 0.01), blood PMNs (p < 0.001), blood and urine CRP (p < 0.01 and
< 0.01), and sputum PMNs (p < 0.001), monocytes (p < 0.05), lymphocytes (p <
0.05), MPO (p < 0.01), TNF-alpha (p < 0.01), and ECP (p < 0.01) while five
subjects develop symptoms. In normal subjects, the response to inhaled LPS is
dose-related, the most sensitive markers of LPS-induced inflammation being the
blood PMNs count with their level of activation, the blood CRP concentration, and
the sputum PMNs count. The no-response threshold to an acute inhalation of LPS is
less than 0.5 microg.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.156.4.97-02002 
PMID: 9351616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Jun;143 ( Pt 6):2085-2095. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-6-2085.

The aldA gene of Escherichia coli is under the control of at least three
transcriptional regulators.

Limón A(1), Hidalgo E(1), Aguilar J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona,
Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Expression studies on the aldA gene encoding aldehyde dehydrogenase in
Escherichia coli showed induction by two types of molecule (hydroxyaldehydes and 
2-oxoglutarate), carbon catabolite repression and respiration dependence.
Promoter deletion analysis showed that the proximal operator, which includes
inducer-regulator complex and catabolite repression protein (Crp) recognition
sites, was necessary for induction by either type of inducer, and that full
induction by aldehydes required the cooperation of distal operator sequences
beyond position -119. Interactions of the regulator protein with the -59 to -6
fragment were shown by DNA mobility shift assays. Fusions of different deletions 
of the aldA promoter to lacZ indicated that a Crp site proximal to the
transcriptional start point (tsp) was functional in the cAMP-dependent catabolite
repression of this system, whereas a distal control site was likely to operate in
a cAMP-independent catabolite repression. DNA mobility shift and footprint
analyses showed that only the tsp proximal site was bound by pure Crp with a Kd
of 5.4 x 10(-7) M. As shown by an Arc-defective strain, the aldA gene seems to be
repressed by the Arc system under anaerobiosis, displaying its physiological full
induction and activity in the presence of oxygen.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-6-2085 
PMID: 9202484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biolumin Chemilumin. 1990 Apr-Jun;5(2):99-106.

Control of the lux regulon of Vibrio fischeri.

Shadel GS(1), Devine JH, Baldwin TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A & M University, College
Station 77843.

Regulation of expression of bioluminescence from the Vibrio fischeri lux regulon 
in Escherichia coli is a consequence of a unique form of positive feedback
superimposed on a poorly defined cis-acting repression mechanism. The lux regulon
consists of two divergently transcribed operons. The leftward operon contains
only a single gene, luxR, which encodes a transcriptional activator protein. The 
rightward operon contains luxI, which together with luxR and the 218 base pairs
separating the two operons comprises the primary regulatory circuit, and the five
structural genes, luxC, luxD, luxA, luxB and luxE, which are required for the
bioluminescence activity. Transcription of luxR from PL is stimulated by binding 
of the E. coli crp gene product to the sequence TGTGACAAAAATCCAA upstream of the 
presumed promoter. Binding of pure E. coli CAP protein in a cAMP-dependent
reaction to the V. fischeri lux regulatory region has been demonstrated by in
vitro footprinting. The luxI gene product is an enzyme which catalyses a
condensation reaction of cytoplasmic substrates to yield the autoinducer,
N-(3-oxo-hexanoyl) homoserine lactone. Accumulation of autoinducer, which is
freely diffusible, results in formation of a complex with LuxR. The complex binds
to the sequence ACCTGTAGGATCGTACAGGT upstream of PR to stimulate transcription of
the rightward operon. Increased transcription from PR should yield increased
levels of LuxI and higher levels of autoinducer which would further activate
LuxR. The LuxR binding site is also a LexA binding site, as demonstrated by in
vitro footprinting. Basal transcription from both PL and PR is repressed by
sequences within the luxR coding region.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/bio.1170050205 
PMID: 2186599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1982 Jul;151(1):153-61.

Isolation and characterization of purine regulatory mutants of Salmonella
typhimurium with an episomal purE-lac fusion.

Thomulka KW, Gots JS.

Expression of the purE operon of Salmonella typhimurium was analyzed by using an 
Escherichia coli F' episome containing a purE-lac fusion. The fusion removes the 
lacOP and part of the lacZ genes of the lac operon and places the intact lacY and
lacA genes under control of the purE operon as shown by inhibition of growth on
melibiose (lacY) and repression of thiogalactoside transacetylase (lacA) by
various purines. Two classes of regulatory-deficient mutants were found among
those resistant to inhibition by purines. One class was trans active
(chromosomal) and corresponded to previously described purR mutants involving a
deficient cytoplasmic repressor substance. These were also altered in the
expression of the purF, purD, purG amd purI genes as evidenced by loss of
repressibility of the synthesis of glycinamide ribotide and aminoimidazole
ribotide. The other class was cis active (episomal), specific for only purE
expression, and thus corresponded to an altered purE operon signal (operator or
promoter). The metabolic requirements for the expression of purE were also
monitored by measuring repression of the transacetylase in strains with various
genetically altered metabolic backgrounds. Repression by guanine required an
intact guanine phosphorbosyltransferase (gpt) and repression by adenine and all
nucleosides required purine nucleoside phosphorylase (deoD). Synthesis of cyclic 
AMP (cya) and its receptor protein (crp) were no longer required for the
expression of the lac genes under purE control.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.151.1.153-161.1982 
PMCID: PMC220220
PMID: 7045073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Gene. 1979 Sep;7(1):1-14.

Preparation and characterization of large amounts of restriction fragments
containing the E. coli lac control elements.

Hardies SC, Wells RD.

Large quantities of pure DNA fragments (789, 203 and 95 bp in length) containing 
the Escherichia coli lac controlling elements (operator, promoter, CRP binding
site) were prepared from appropriate recombinant plasmids. High pressure liquid
chromatography on RPC-5 or preparative sucrose gradient centrifugation was used
to fractionate the pVH51 vector from the inserts. The fragments had few, if any, 
nicks or depurinated sites, and the majority of the fragment ends were intact.
Absorbance-temperature profiles on the fragments showed multiphasic transitions.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(79)90039-8 
PMID: 387526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (recF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 2009;(4):27-31.

[Antibacterial effects of silver ions: effect on gram-negative bacteria growth
and biofilm formation].

[Article in Russian]

Radtsig MA, Koksharova OA, Khmel' IA.

Minimal inhibiting AgNO3 concentration (MICs) in the gram-negative bacteria
Escherichia coli K12, Serratia proteamaculans 94, and Serratia liquefaciens MG1
were found to be on the average within the range of 0.075-0.3 microg/ml, and for 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 and P. chlororaphis 449, 0.15-0.3 microg/ml. Biofilm 
formation in Escherichia coli AB1157 and S. Proteamaculans 94 was completely
inhibited at an AgNO3 concentration of 0.3 microg/ml, and in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1, at 0.6 microg/mlAgNO3. Mutations in E. coli genes encoding for
global regulators of gene expression, such as sigma S and sigma N subunits of RNA
polymerase, catabolite repression protein CRP, and Lon protease, had no marked
effect on the sensitivity of cells to silver. The wild-type E. coli strains and
strains deficient in excision repair (uvrA, uvrB), SOS-repair or recombination
(recA, lexA, recBC, recF mutants) did not differ in their silver sensitivity.
This suggests that the sensitivity of bacteria to silver does not correlate with 
DNA lesions that could be repaired by these repair and recombination systems. E. 
coli mutant strains deficient in porins OmpF or OmpC, were 3-4-fold more
resistant to silver ions as compared with the wild-type strain. Experiments with 
pME6863 plasmid harboring the gene of N-acyl-homoserine lactonase AiiA
demonstrated that Quorum Sensing regulation (QS) did not participate in the
control of S. proteamaculans 94 and P. chlororaphis 449 silver sensitivity. The
same conclusion was drawn from the comparison of AgNO3 MICs for the S.
liquefaciens wild-type strain and a mutant strain deficient in QS.


PMID: 20017360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (sdiA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Environ Int. 2018 Nov;120:421-430. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.07.046. Epub 2018
Aug 18.

Antidepressant fluoxetine induces multiple antibiotics resistance in Escherichia 
coli via ROS-mediated mutagenesis.

Jin M(1), Lu J(2), Chen Z(2), Nguyen SH(3), Mao L(2), Li J(4), Yuan Z(2), Guo
J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia; Department of Environment and Health, Tianjin
Institute of Environmental & Operational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Risk
Assessment and Control for Environment & Food Safety, Tianjin 300050, China.
(2)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
(4)Department of Environment and Health, Tianjin Institute of Environmental &
Operational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Risk Assessment and Control for
Environment & Food Safety, Tianjin 300050, China.
(5)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. Electronic address: j.guo@awmc.uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Antibiotic resistance poses a great threat to global public health.
Overuse of antibiotics is generally considered as the major factor contributing
to it. However, little is known about whether non-antibiotic drugs could play
potential roles in the emergence of antibiotic resistance.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether antidepressant fluoxetine induces
multiple antibiotic resistances and reveal underlying mechanisms.
METHODOLOGY: Escherichia coli K12 was exposed to different concentrations of
fluoxetine (0, 0.5, 5, 50 and 100 mg/L) and the resistant strains were isolated
by plating on antibiotic containing plates. Resistant strains were randomly
selected to determine the increase of minimum inhibition concentration (MIC) of
multiple antibiotics. Genome-wide DNA sequencing was performed on cells cultured 
in lysogeny broth (LB) without any fluoxetine or antibiotics exposure. RNA
sequencing and proteomic profiling of isolated mutants grown in LB with 100 mg/L 
fluoxetine were analyzed to reveal the underlying mechanisms.
RESULTS: Exposure of Escherichia coli to fluoxetine at 5-100 mg/L after repeated 
subculture in LB for 30 days promoted its mutation frequency resulting in
increased resistance against the antibiotics chloramphenicol, amoxicillin and
tetracycline. This increase was up to 5.0 × 107 fold in a dose-time pattern.
Isolated mutants with resistance to one of these antibiotics also exhibited
multiple resistances against fluoroquinolone, aminoglycoside, β-lactams,
tetracycline and chloramphenicol. According to global transcriptional and
proteomic analyses, the AcrAB-TolC pump together with the YadG/YadH transporter, 
a Tsx channel and the MdtEF-TolC pump have been triggered to export the
antibiotics to the exterior of the cell. Whole-genome DNA analysis of the mutants
further revealed that ROS-mediated mutagenesis (e.g., deletion, insertion, and
substitution) of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators (e.g., marR, rob, sdiA,
cytR and crp) to up-regulate the expression of efflux pumps, may further enhance 
the antibiotic efflux.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings for the first time demonstrated that the exposure to
antidepressant fluoxetine induces multiple antibiotic resistance in E. coli via
the ROS-mediated mutagenesis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.07.046 
PMID: 30125859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2013 Jul;195(14):3156-64. doi: 10.1128/JB.02254-12. Epub 2013 May
10.

The multifunctional protein YdiV represses P fimbria-mediated adherence in
uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Spurbeck RR(1), Alteri CJ, Himpsl SD, Mobley HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

YdiV, a degenerate EAL domain protein, represses motility by interacting with
FlhD to abolish FlhDC interaction with DNA. Here, we demonstrate that deletion of
ydiV dysregulates coordinate control of motility and adherence by increasing
adherence of Escherichia coli CFT073 to a bladder epithelial cell line by
specifically increasing production of P fimbriae. Interestingly, only one of the 
two P fimbrial operons, pap_2, present in the genome of E. coli CFT073 was
upregulated. This derepression of the pap_2 operon is abolished following
deletion of either cya or crp, demonstrating cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent
activation of the P fimbrial operon. However, the absence of YdiV does not affect
the gene expression of cya and crp, and loss of SdiA in the ydiV mutant does not 
affect the derepression of the pap_2 operon, suggesting that YdiV control of
adherence acts in response to cAMP levels. Deletion of ydiV increases motility by
increasing expression of fliA, suggesting that in E. coli CFT073, YdiV regulates 
motility by the same mechanism as that described previously for commensal E. coli
strains. Furthermore, analysis of site-directed mutations found two putative
Mg(2+)-binding residues of four conserved YdiV residues (E29 and Q219) that were 
involved in regulation of motility and FliC production, while two conserved
c-di-GMP-binding residues (D156 and D165) only affected motility. None of the
four conserved YdiV residues appeared to affect regulation of adherence.
Therefore, we propose a model in which a degenerate EAL, YdiV, utilizes different
domains to regulate motility through interaction with FlhD and adherence to
epithelial cells through cAMP-dependent effects on the pap_2 promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02254-12 
PMCID: PMC3697638
PMID: 23667238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jan;78(2):411-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

Indole production promotes Escherichia coli mixed-culture growth with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by inhibiting quorum signaling.

Chu W(1), Zere TR, Weber MM, Wood TK, Whiteley M, Hidalgo-Romano B, Valenzuela E 
Jr, McLean RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Science and Technology, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

Indole production by Escherichia coli, discovered in the early 20th century, has 
been used as a diagnostic marker for distinguishing E. coli from other enteric
bacteria. By using transcriptional profiling and competition studies with defined
mutants, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP)-regulated indole formation is a major
factor that enables E. coli growth in mixed biofilm and planktonic populations
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mutants deficient in cAMP production (cyaA) or the
cAMP receptor gene (crp), as well as indole production (tnaA), were not
competitive in coculture with P. aeruginosa but could be restored to wild-type
competitiveness by supplementation with a physiologically relevant indole
concentration. E. coli sdiA mutants, which lacked the receptor for both indole
and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs), showed no change in competitive fitness,
suggesting that indole acted directly on P. aeruginosa. An E. coli tnaA mutant
strain regained wild-type competiveness if grown with P. aeruginosa AHL synthase 
(rhlI and rhlI lasI) mutants. In contrast to the wild type, P. aeruginosa AHL
synthase mutants were unable to degrade indole. Indole produced during
mixed-culture growth inhibited pyocyanin production and other AHL-regulated
virulence factors in P. aeruginosa. Mixed-culture growth with P. aeruginosa
stimulated indole formation in E. coli cpdA, which is unable to regulate cAMP
levels, suggesting the potential for mixed-culture gene activation via cAMP.
These findings illustrate how indole, an early described feature of E. coli
central metabolism, can play a significant role in mixed-culture survival by
inhibiting quorum-regulated competition factors in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11 
PMCID: PMC3255741
PMID: 22101045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):937-48. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.67.

An EAL domain protein and cyclic AMP contribute to the interaction between the
two quorum sensing systems in Escherichia coli.

Zhou X(1), Meng X, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China.

Quorum sensing (QS) is a bacterial cell-cell communication process by which
bacteria communicate using extracellular signals called autoinducers. Two QS
systems have been identified in Escherichia coli K-12, including an intact QS
system 2 that is stimulated by the cyclic AMP (cAMP)-cAMP receptor protein (CRP) 
complex and a partial QS system 1 that consists of SdiA (suppressor of cell
division inhibitor) responding to signals generated by other microbial species.
The relationship between QS system 1 and system 2 in E. coli, however, remains
obscure. Here, we show that an EAL domain protein, encoded by ydiV, and cAMP are 
involved in the interaction between the two QS systems in E. coli. Expression of 
sdiA and ydiV is inhibited by glucose. SdiA binds to the ydiV promoter region in 
a dose-dependent, but nonspecific, manner; extracellular autoinducer 1 from other
species stimulates ydiV expression in an sdiA-dependent manner. Furthermore, we
discovered that the double sdiA-ydiV mutation, but not the single mutation,
causes a 2-fold decrease in intracellular cAMP concentration that leads to the
inhibition of QS system 2. These results indicate that signaling pathways that
respond to important environmental cues, such as autoinducers and glucose, are
linked together for their control in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.67 
PMID: 18560382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((csgD) AND (yhbT)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2011 May;193(10):2587-97. doi: 10.1128/JB.01468-10. Epub 2011 Mar
18.

Role of the biofilm master regulator CsgD in cross-regulation between biofilm
formation and flagellar synthesis.

Ogasawara H(1), Yamamoto K, Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8584, 
Japan.

CsgD, the master regulator of biofilm formation, activates the synthesis of curli
fimbriae and extracellular polysaccharides in Escherichia coli. To obtain
insights into its regulatory role, we have identified a total of 20 novel
regulation target genes on the E. coli genome by using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip analysis with a high-density DNA microarray.
By DNase I footprinting, the consensus CsgD-binding sequence predicted from a
total of 18 target sites was found to include AAAAGNG(N(2))AAAWW. After a
promoter-lacZ fusion assay, the CsgD targets were classified into two groups:
group I genes, such as fliE and yhbT, are repressed by CsgD, while group II
genes, including yccT and adrA, are activated by CsgD. The fliE and fliEFGH
operons for flagellum formation are directly repressed by CsgD, while CsgD
activates the adrA gene, which encodes an enzyme for synthesis of cyclic di-GMP, 
a bacterial second messenger, which in turn inhibits flagellum production and
rotation. Taking these findings together, we propose that the cell motility for
planktonic growth is repressed by CsgD, thereby promoting the switch to biofilm
formation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01468-10 
PMCID: PMC3133154
PMID: 21421764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cueR) AND (cueR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 19;22(4). pii: 2050. doi: 10.3390/ijms22042050.

Advances in Understanding of the Copper Homeostasis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Hofmann L(1), Hirsch M(1), Ruthstein S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials & Department of Chemistry, 
Faculty of Exact Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.

Thirty-five thousand people die as a result of more than 2.8 million
antibiotic-resistant infections in the United States of America per year.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) is classified a serious threat, the
second-highest threat category of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Among others, the World Health Organization (WHO) encourages the
discovery and development of novel antibiotic classes with new targets and
mechanisms of action without cross-resistance to existing classes. To find
potential new target sites in pathogenic bacteria, such as P. aeruginosa, it is
inevitable to fully understand the molecular mechanism of homeostasis,
metabolism, regulation, growth, and resistances thereof. P. aeruginosa maintains 
a sophisticated copper defense cascade comprising three stages, resembling those 
of public safety organizations. These stages include copper scavenging, first
responder, and second responder. Similar mechanisms are found in numerous
pathogens. Here we compare the copper-dependent transcription regulators cueR and
copRS of Escherichia coli (E. coli) and P. aeruginosa. Further, phylogenetic
analysis and structural modelling of mexPQ-opmE reveal that this efflux pump is
unlikely to be involved in the copper export of P. aeruginosa. Altogether, we
present current understandings of the copper homeostasis in P. aeruginosa and
potential new target sites for antimicrobial agents or a combinatorial drug
regimen in the fight against multidrug resistant pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22042050 
PMCID: PMC7922089
PMID: 33669570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nat Chem Biol. 2021 Jan;17(1):57-64. doi: 10.1038/s41589-020-00653-x. Epub 2020
Sep 28.

CueR activates transcription through a DNA distortion mechanism.

Fang C(#)(1)(2), Philips SJ(#)(3), Wu X(1)(2), Chen K(3), Shi J(4), Shen L(1)(2),
Xu J(1)(2), Feng Y(5), O'Halloran TV(6)(7)(8), Zhang Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular
Plant Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Biophysics, and Department of Pathology of Sir Run Run Shaw
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Biophysics, and Department of Pathology of Sir Run Run Shaw
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
yufengjay@zju.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
t-ohalloran@northwestern.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
USA. t-ohalloran@northwestern.edu.
(8)The Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
IL, USA. t-ohalloran@northwestern.edu.
(9)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular
Plant Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. yzhang@sippe.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The MerR-family transcription factors (TFs) are a large group of bacterial
proteins responding to cellular metal ions and multiple antibiotics by binding
within central RNA polymerase-binding regions of a promoter. While most TFs alter
transcription through protein-protein interactions, MerR TFs are capable of
reshaping promoter DNA. To address the question of which mechanism prevails, we
determined two cryo-EM structures of transcription activation complexes (TAC)
comprising Escherichia coli CueR (a prototype MerR TF), RNAP holoenzyme and
promoter DNA. The structures reveal that this TF promotes productive
promoter-polymerase association without canonical protein-protein contacts seen
between other activator proteins and RNAP. Instead, CueR realigns the key
promoter elements in the transcription activation complex by clamp-like
protein-DNA interactions: these induce four distinct kinks that ultimately
position the -10 element for formation of the transcription bubble. These
structural and biochemical results provide strong support for the DNA distortion 
paradigm of allosteric transcriptional control by MerR TFs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41589-020-00653-x 
PMID: 32989300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2019 Nov 8;294(45):16978-16991. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010023. Epub 
2019 Oct 4.

Zinc excess increases cellular demand for iron and decreases tolerance to copper 
in Escherichia coli.

Xu Z(1), Wang P(1), Wang H(2), Yu ZH(2), Au-Yeung HY(2), Hirayama T(3), Sun H(2),
Yan A(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong,
China.
(3)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Gifu Pharmaceutical
University, 1-25-4, Dairaku-nishi, Gifu, 501-1196, Japan.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, China ayan8@hku.hk.

Transition metals serve as an important class of micronutrients that are
indispensable for bacterial physiology but are cytotoxic when they are in excess.
Bacteria have developed exquisite homeostatic systems to control the uptake,
storage, and efflux of each of biological metals and maintain a thermodynamically
balanced metal quota. However, whether the pathways that control the homeostasis 
of different biological metals cross-talk and render cross-resistance or
sensitivity in the host-pathogen interface remains largely unknown. Here, we
report that zinc (Zn) excess perturbs iron (Fe) and copper (Cu) homeostasis in
Escherichia coli, resulting in increased Fe and decreased Cu levels in the cell. 
Gene expression analysis revealed that Zn excess transiently up-regulates
Fe-uptake genes and down-regulates Fe-storage genes and thereby increases the
cellular Fe quota. In vitro and in vivo protein-DNA binding assays revealed that 
the elevated intracellular Fe poisons the primary Cu detoxification transcription
regulator CueR, resulting in dysregulation of its target genes copA and cueO and 
activation of the secondary Cu detoxification system CusSR-cusCFBA
Supplementation with the Fe chelator 2,2'-dipyridyl (DIP) or with the reducing
agent GSH abolished the induction of cusCFBA during Zn excess. Consistent with
the importance of this metal homeostatic network in cell physiology, combined
metal treatment, including simultaneously overloading cells with both Zn (0.25
mm) and Cu (0.25 mm) and sequestering Fe with DIP (50 μm), substantially
inhibited E. coli growth. These results advance our understanding of bacterial
metallobiology and may inform the development of metal-based antimicrobial
regimens to manage infectious diseases.

© 2019 Xu et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010023 
PMCID: PMC6851343
PMID: 31586033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Chemistry. 2019 Nov 27;25(66):15030-15035. doi: 10.1002/chem.201902940. Epub 2019
Oct 15.

C-terminal Cysteines of CueR Act as Auxiliary Metal Site Ligands upon HgII
Binding-A Mechanism To Prevent Transcriptional Activation by Divalent Metal Ions?

Balogh RK(1), Gyurcsik B(1), Hunyadi-Gulyás É(2), Schell J(3), Thulstrup PW(4),
Hemmingsen L(4), Jancsó A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Szeged, Dóm
tér 7, 6720, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Laboratory of Proteomics Research, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Temesvári krt. 62, 6726,
Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Institute for Materials Science and Center for Nanointegration Duisburg-Essen 
(CENIDE), University of Duisburg-Essen, 45141 Essen (Germany), European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), 1211, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5, 2100,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Intracellular CuI is controlled by the transcriptional regulator CueR, which
effectively discriminates between monovalent and divalent metal ions. It is
intriguing that HgII does not activate transcription, as bis-thiolate metal sites
exhibit high affinity for HgII . Here the binding of HgII to CueR and a truncated
variant, ΔC7-CueR, without the last 7 amino acids at the C-terminus including a
conserved CCHH motif is explored. ESI-MS demonstrates that up to two HgII bind to
CueR, while ΔC7-CueR accommodates only one HgII . 199m Hg PAC and UV absorption
spectroscopy indicate HgS2 structure at both the functional and the CCHH metal
site. However, at sub-equimolar concentrations of HgII at pH 8.0, the metal
binding site displays an equilibrium between HgS2 and HgS3 , involving cysteines 
from both sites. We hypothesize that the C-terminal CCHH motif provides auxiliary
ligands that coordinate to HgII and thereby prevents activation of transcription.

© 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201902940 
PMCID: PMC6899792
PMID: 31365771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Aug;103(16):6797-6807. doi:
10.1007/s00253-019-09984-9. Epub 2019 Jun 25.

Biodetection and bioremediation of copper ions in environmental water samples
using a temperature-controlled, dual-functional Escherichia coli cell.

Wang W(1), Jiang F(2), Wu F(2), Li J(2), Ge R(2), Li J(2), Tan G(2), Pang Y(2),
Zhou X(2), Ren X(2), Fan B(2), Lyu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China. wangwu@wmu.edu.cn.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China. jxlu313@163.com.

Although a variety of whole-cell biosensors and biosorbents have been developed
for detection and removal of heavy metal contaminants, few whole cells can be
applied to both monitoring and remediation of copper pollution in water. In this 
study, a modified plasmid was constructed by incorporating a copper-sensing
element and a copper-adsorbing element into a temperature-inducible plasmid,
pBV220. This plasmid was subsequently transformed into an engineered Escherichia 
coli strain lacking copA and cueO. This dual-functional E. coli cell selectively 
responded to copper ions with a linear detection range of 0.01-25 μM at 37 °C and
could express surface-displayed CueR when treated at 42 °C without any costly
chemical inducers. The display of CueR on the cell surface specifically enhanced 
its copper adsorption capacity and rapidly removed copper ions from aqueous
solutions. In addition, the CueR surface-displayed cells could be regenerated by 
adsorption-desorption cycles via pH regulation. Moreover, by simply using two
different temperatures, the detection or adsorption of copper using this
dual-functional whole cell was achieved without any cross-interference. Most
importantly, it provided highly sensitive, accurate quantification, and effective
removal of copper in real environmental water samples. Thus, this E. coli cell
can be used for large-scale detection and remediation of copper pollutants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-019-09984-9 
PMID: 31240366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Mar;103(6):2797-2808. doi:
10.1007/s00253-018-9490-7. Epub 2019 Jan 15.

Engineering and characterization of copper and gold sensors in Escherichia coli
and Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002.

Lacey RF(1), Ye D(2), Ruffing AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioenergy and Defense Technologies, Sandia National
Laboratories, P.O. Box 5800, MS 1413, Albuquerque, NM, 87185-1413, USA.
(2)Department of Nanobiology, Sandia National Laboratories, P.O. Box 5800, MS
1413, Albuquerque, NM, 87185-1413, USA.
(3)Department of Bioenergy and Defense Technologies, Sandia National
Laboratories, P.O. Box 5800, MS 1413, Albuquerque, NM, 87185-1413, USA.
aruffin@sandia.gov.

The anthropogenic release of toxic metals into the environment poses danger to
the health of both humans and the local ecosystem. Biosensors for the detection
of metals have been developed to improve our ability to monitor these
environmental contaminants, yet most of these sensors use heterotrophic bacterial
hosts, which require a fixed carbon source and do not typically grow in natural
waterways. In this study, we constructed and characterized metal sensors for
development of a photoautotrophic biosensor using Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. We 
characterized gold and copper sensors based on modified MerR transcriptional
activators: GolSA113T, with improved gold binding, and GolSCL, containing the
metal-binding loop from CueR which binds both gold and copper. The metal-sensing 
constructs were first optimized and characterized in Escherichia coli MG1655. The
addition of a strong ribosome binding site to the optical reporter protein
increased translation of the fluorescent reporter, and expression of golSA113T
from the rbc promoter of Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 improved the response to gold
in MG1655. In rich medium, the GolSA113T-based E. coli sensor detected gold at
concentrations as low as 100 nM, while the GolSCL-based E. coli sensor detected
gold and copper at sensitivities of 100 nM and 10 μM, respectively. Both E. coli 
sensors responded to gold and copper yet showed no detectable response to other
metals. Abiotic factors, such as medium complexity, were found to influence the
response of the E. coli sensors, with minimal medium resulting in higher
sensitivities of detection. Expression of the GolSA113T- and GolSCL-based sensor 
constructs in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 resulted in
photoautotrophic gold sensors, but these biosensors failed to produce a
significant response to copper. Moreover, the fluorescence response of the
cyanobacterial sensors to gold was significantly reduced compared to that of
analogous E. coli sensors. While this effort demonstrates feasibility for the
development of photoautotrophic biosensors, additional efforts to optimize sensor
performance will be required.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-9490-7 
PMID: 30645690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2019 Mar 4;58(10):3053-3056. doi: 10.1002/anie.201810656.
Epub 2019 Jan 16.

EPR Spectroscopy Detects Various Active State Conformations of the
Transcriptional Regulator CueR.

Sameach H(1), Ghosh S(2), Gevorkyan-Airapetov L(1), Saxena S(2), Ruthstein S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Exact Sciences, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, 5290002, Israel.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA.

The interactions between proteins and their specific DNA sequences are the basis 
of many cellular processes. Hence, developing methods to build an atomic level
picture of these interactions helps improve our understanding of key cellular
mechanisms. CueR is an Escherichia coli copper-sensing transcription regulator.
The inhibition of copper-sensing transcription regulators can kill pathogens,
without harming the host. Several spectroscopic studies and crystallographic data
have suggested that changes in the conformation of both the DNA and the protein
control transcription. However, due to the inadequate resolution of these
methods, the exact number of active conformations of CueR has not been
determined. Resolving the structure of CueR in its active state is highly
important for the development of specific inhibitors. Herein, the potential of
double-histidine (dHis)-based CuII spin labeling for the identification of
various conformational states of CueR during transcription is shown.

© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201810656 
PMID: 30566257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Acc Chem Res. 2018 Apr 17;51(4):860-868. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00541. Epub 
2018 Jan 25.

Facilitated Unbinding via Multivalency-Enabled Ternary Complexes: New Paradigm
for Protein-DNA Interactions.

Chen TY(1), Cheng YS(1), Huang PS(1), Chen P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , University of Houston , Houston , Texas 77204 ,
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Cornell University , Ithaca ,
New York 14853 , United States.

Dynamic protein-DNA interactions constitute highly robust cellular machineries to
fulfill cellular functions. A vast number of studies have focused on how
DNA-binding proteins search for and interact with their target DNA segments and
on what cellular cues can regulate protein binding, for which protein
concentration is a most obvious one. In contrast, how protein unbinding could be 
regulated by protein concentration has evaded attention because protein unbinding
from DNA is typically a unimolecular reaction and thus concentration independent.
Recent single-molecule studies from multiple research groups have uncovered that 
protein concentration can facilitate the unbinding of DNA-bound proteins,
revealing regulation of protein unbinding as another mechanistic paradigm for
gene regulation. In this Account, we review these recent in vitro and in vivo
single-molecule experiments that uncovered the concentration-facilitated protein 
unbinding by multiple types of DNA-binding proteins, including
sequence-nonspecific DNA-binding proteins (e.g., nucleoid-associated proteins,
NAP), sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins (e.g., metal-responsive
transcription regulators CueR and ZntR), sequence-neutral single-stranded
DNA-binding proteins (e.g., Replication protein A, RPA), and DNA polymerases. For
the in vitro experiments, Marko's group investigated the exchange of GFP-tagged
DNA-bound NAPs with nontagged NAPs in solution of increasing concentration using 
single-molecule magnetic-tweezers fluorescence microscopy. The faster
fluorescence intensity decrease with higher nontagged NAP concentrations suggests
that DNA-bound NAPs undergo faster exchange with higher free NAP concentrations. 
Chen's group used single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer
measurements to study the unbinding of CueR from its cognate oligomeric DNA. The 
average microscopic dwell times of DNA-bound states become shorter with
increasing CueR concentrations in the surroundings, demonstrating that free CueR 
proteins can facilitate the unbinding of the incumbent one on DNA through either 
assisted dissociation or direct substitution. Greene's group studied the
unbinding of RPAs from single-stranded DNA using total internal reflection
fluorescence microscopy and DNA curtain techniques. The fluorescence intensity
versus time traces show faster decay with higher wild-type RPA concentrations,
indicating that DNA-bound RPAs can undergo a concentration-facilitated exchange
when encountering excess free RPA. van Oijen's group investigated the
leading/lagging-strand polymerase exchange events in the bacteriophage T7 and E. 
coli replication systems using a combination of single-molecule fluorescence
microscopy and DNA-flow-stretching assay. The processivity was observed to have
larger decrease when the concentration of the Y526F polymerase mutant increases, 
indicating that the unbinding of the polymerase is also concentration-dependent. 
Using stroboscopic imaging and single-molecule tracking, Chen's group further
advanced their study into living bacterial cells. They found CueR, as well as its
homologue ZntR, shows concentration-enhanced unbinding from its DNA-binding site 
in vivo. Mechanistic consensus has emerged from these in vitro and in vivo
single-molecule studies that encompass a range of proteins with distinct
biological functions. It involves multivalent contacts between protein and DNA.
The multivalency enables the formation of ternary complexes as intermediates,
which subsequently give rise to concentration-enhanced protein unbinding. As
multivalent contacts are ubiquitous among DNA-interacting proteins, this
multivalency-enabled facilitated unbinding mechanism thus provides a potentially 
general mechanistic paradigm in regulating protein-DNA interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00541 
PMCID: PMC5904000
PMID: 29368512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Feb;102(3):1513-1521. doi:
10.1007/s00253-017-8677-7. Epub 2017 Dec 15.

Enhancing the copper-sensing capability of Escherichia coli-based whole-cell
bioreporters by genetic engineering.

Kang Y(#)(1), Lee W(#)(1), Kim S(1), Jang G(2), Kim BG(3), Yoon Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute of Agriculture
and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department Forest Resources, Gyeongnam National University of Science and
Technology, 33 Dongjin-ro, Jinju-si, Gyeongsangman-do, 52725, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. yyoon21@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Metals are essential to all organisms; accordingly, cells employ numerous genes
to maintain metal homeostasis as high levels can be toxic. In the present study, 
the gene operons responsive to metal(loid)s were employed to generate bacterial
cell-based biosensors to detect target metal(loid)s. The cluster of genes related
to copper transport known as the cop-operon is regulated by the interaction
between the copA promoter region (copAp) and CueR, turning on and off gene
expression upon copper ion binding. Therefore, the detection of copper ions could
be achieved by inserting a plasmid harboring the fusion of copAp and reporter
genes, such as enzymes and fluorescent genes. However, copAp is not as strong a
promoter as other metal-inducible promoters, such as znt-, mer-, and ars-operons;
thereby, its sensitivity toward copper ions was not sufficient for
quantification. To overcome this problem, we engineered Escherichia coli with a
deletion of copA to interfere with copper export from cells. The engineered E.
coli whole-cell bioreporter was able to detect copper ions at 0 to 10 μM in an
aqueous solution. Most importantly, it was specific to copper among several
tested heavy metal(loid)s. Therefore, it will likely be useful to detect copper
in diverse environmental systems. Although additional improvements are still
required to optimize the E. coli-based copper-sensing whole-cell bioreporters
presented in this study, our results suggest that there is huge potential to
generate whole-cell bioreporters for additional targets by molecular engineering.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-017-8677-7 
PMID: 29243083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jun 27;114(26):6818-6823. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1620232114. Epub 2017 Jun 13.

Interplay between tolerance mechanisms to copper and acid stress in Escherichia
coli.

Djoko KY(1), Phan MD(2), Peters KM(2), Walker MJ(2), Schembri MA(2), McEwan
AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072,
Australia k.djoko@uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072,
Australia.

Copper (Cu) is a key antibacterial component of the host innate immune system and
almost all bacterial species possess systems that defend against the toxic
effects of excess Cu. The Cu tolerance system in Gram-negative bacteria is
composed minimally of a Cu sensor (CueR) and a Cu export pump (CopA). The cueR
and copA genes are encoded on the chromosome typically as a divergent but
contiguous operon. In Escherichia coli, cueR and copA are separated by two
additional genes, ybaS and ybaT, which confer glutamine (Gln)-dependent acid
tolerance and contribute to the glutamate (Glu)-dependent acid resistance system 
in this organism. Here we show that Cu strongly inhibits growth of a ∆copA mutant
strain in acidic cultures. We further demonstrate that Cu stress impairs the
pathway for Glu biosynthesis via glutamate synthase, leading to decreased
intracellular levels of Glu. Addition of exogenous Glu rescues the ∆copA mutant
from Cu stress in acidic conditions. Gln is also protective but this relies on
the activities of YbaS and YbaT. Notably, expression of both enzymes is
up-regulated during Cu stress. These results demonstrate a link between Cu
stress, acid stress, and Glu/Gln metabolism, establish a role for YbaS and YbaT
in Cu tolerance, and suggest that subtle changes in core metabolic pathways may
contribute to overcoming host-imposed copper toxicity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1620232114 
PMCID: PMC5495233
PMID: 28611214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


############# ((cueR) AND (cusC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Apr;56(1):215-27.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli to external copper.

Yamamoto K(1), Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kinki University, Nakamachi 3327-204,
Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli upon exposure to external copper was
studied using DNA microarray and in vivo and in vitro transcription assays.
Transcription of three hitherto-identified copper-responsive genes, copA (copper 
efflux transporter), cueO (multicopper oxidase) and cusC (tripartite copper pump 
component) became maximum at 5 min after addition of copper sulphate, and
thereafter decreased to the preshift levels within 30 min. Microarray analysis at
5 min after addition of copper indicated that a total of at least 29 genes
including these three known genes were markedly and specifically affected (28
upregulated and one downregulated). Transcription of the divergent operons,
cusCFB and cusRS, was found to be activated by CusR, which bound to a CusR box
between the cusC and cusR promoters. Except for this site, the CusR box was not
identified in the entire E. coli genome. On the other hand, transcription of copA
and cueO was found to be activated by another copper-responsive factor CueR,
which bound to a conserved inverted repeat sequence, CueR box. A total of 197
CueR boxes were identified on the E. coli genome, including the CueR box
associated with the moa operon for molybdenum cofactor synthesis. At least 10
copper-induced genes were found to be under the control of CpxAR two-component
system, indicating that copper is one of the signals for activation of the CpxAR 
system. In addition, transcription of yedWV, a putative two-component system, was
activated by copper in CusR-dependent manner. Taken together we conclude that the
copper-responsive genes are organized into a hierarchy of the regulation network,
forming at least four regulons, i.e. CueR, CusR, CpxR and YedW regulons. These
copper-responsive regulons appear to sense and respond to different
concentrations of external copper.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04532.x 
PMID: 15773991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (glpK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 1998 May;180(10):2782-7.

Menaquinone (vitamin K2) biosynthesis: localization and characterization of the
menA gene from Escherichia coli.

Suvarna K(1), Stevenson D, Meganathan R, Hudspeth ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb,
Illinois 60115, USA.

A key reaction in the biosynthesis of menaquinone involves the conversion of the 
soluble bicyclic naphthalenoid compound 1, 4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid (DHNA) to
the membrane-bound demethylmenaquinone. The enzyme catalyzing this reaction,
DHNA-octaprenyltransferase, attaches a 40-carbon side chain to DHNA. The menA
gene encoding this enzyme has been cloned and localized to a 2.0-kb region of the
Escherichia coli genome between cytR and glpK. DNA sequence analysis of the
cloned insert revealed a 308-codon open reading frame (ORF), which by deletion
analyses was shown to restore anaerobic growth of a menA mutant. Reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography analysis of quinones extracted from the
orf-complemented cells independently confirmed the restoration of menaquinone
biosynthesis, and similarly, analyses of isolated cell membranes for DHNA
octaprenyltransferase activity confirmed the introduction of the menA product
into the orf-complemented menA mutant. The validity of an ORF-associated putative
promoter sequence was confirmed by primer extension analyses.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.10.2782-2787.1998 
PMCID: PMC107237
PMID: 9573170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (malE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 1991 Aug;173(15):4862-76.

The malX malY operon of Escherichia coli encodes a novel enzyme II of the
phosphotransferase system recognizing glucose and maltose and an enzyme
abolishing the endogenous induction of the maltose system.

Reidl J(1), Boos W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Federal Republic of Germany.

Mutants lacking MalK, a subunit of the binding protein-dependent
maltose-maltodextrin transport system, constitutively express the maltose genes. 
A second site mutation in malI abolishes the constitutive expression. The malI
gene (at 36 min on the linkage map) codes for a typical repressor protein that is
homologous to the Escherichia coli LacI, GalR, or CytR repressor (J. Reidl, K.
Römisch, M. Ehrmann, and W. Boos, J. Bacteriol. 171:4888-4899, 1989). We now
report that MalI regulates an adjacent and divergently oriented operon containing
malX and malY. MalX encodes a protein with a molecular weight of 56,654, and the 
deduced amino acid sequence of MalX exhibits 34.9% identity to the enzyme II of
the phosphototransferase system for glucose (ptsG) and 32.1% identity to the
enzyme II for N-acetylglucosamine (nagE). When constitutively expressed, malX can
complement a ptsG ptsM double mutant for growth on glucose. Also, a delta malE
malT(Con) strain that is unable to grow on maltose due to its maltose transport
defect becomes Mal+ after introduction of malI::Tn10 and the plasmid carrying
malX. MalX-mediated transport of glucose and maltose is likely to occur by
facilitated diffusion. We conclude that malX encodes a phosphotransferase system 
enzyme II that can recognize glucose and maltose as substrates even though these 
sugars may not represent the natural substrates of the system. The second gene in
the operon, malY, encodes a protein of 43,500 daltons. Its deduced amino acid
sequence exhibits weak homology to aminotransferase sequences. The presence of
plasmid-encoded MalX alone was sufficient for complementing growth on glucose in 
a ptsM ptsG glk mutant, and the plasmid-encoded MalY alone was sufficient to
abolish the constitutivity of the mal genes in a malK mutant. The overexpression 
of malY in a strain that is wild type with respect to the maltose genes strongly 
interferes with growth on maltose. This is not the case in a malT(Con) strain
that expresses the mal genes constitutively. We conclude that malY encodes an
enzyme that degrades the inducer of the maltose system or prevents its synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.15.4862-4876.1991 
PMCID: PMC208166
PMID: 1856179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (manY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Dec 1;44(21):10515-10525. Epub 2016 Oct 24.

Insightful directed evolution of Escherichia coli quorum sensing promoter region 
of the lsrACDBFG operon: a tool for synthetic biology systems and protein
expression.

Hauk P(1)(2), Stephens K(1)(2), Mckay R(1)(2), Virgile CR(1)(2), Ueda H(3),
Ostermeier M(4), Ryu KS(5), Sintim HO(6), Bentley WE(7)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)Fischell Department of Bioengineering, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742,
USA.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins
University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
(5)Protein Structure Group, Korea Basic Science Institute, 162 Yeongudangi-Ro,
Ochang-Eup, Cheongju-Si, Chungcheongbuk-Do 363-883, South Korea.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.
(7)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, College Park, MD, USA
bentley@umd.edu.

Quorum sensing (QS) regulates many natural phenotypes (e.q. virulence, biofilm
formation, antibiotic resistance), and its components, when incorporated into
synthetic genetic circuits, enable user-directed phenotypes. We created a library
of Escherichia coli lsr operon promoters using error-prone PCR (ePCR) and
selected for promoters that provided E. coli with higher tetracycline resistance 
over the native promoter when placed upstream of the tet(C) gene. Among the
fourteen clones identified, we found several mutations in the binding sites of QS
repressor, LsrR. Using site-directed mutagenesis we restored all p-lsrR-box sites
to the native sequence in order to maintain LsrR repression of the promoter,
preserving the other mutations for analysis. Two promoter variants, EP01rec and
EP14rec, were discovered exhibiting enhanced protein expression. In turn, these
variants retained their ability to exhibit the LsrR-mediated QS switching
activity. Their sequences suggest regulatory linkage between CytR (CRP repressor)
and LsrR. These promoters improve upon the native system and exhibit advantages
over synthetic QS promoters previously reported. Incorporation of these promoters
will facilitate future applications of QS-regulation in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw981 
PMCID: PMC5137460
PMID: 27915294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 1998 Jan;27(1):41-50.

DNA-binding characteristics of the Escherichia coli CytR regulator: a relaxed
spacing requirement between operator half-sites is provided by a flexible,
unstructured interdomain linker.

Jørgensen CI(1), Kallipolitis BH, Valentin-Hansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Odense University, Odense M, Denmark.

The Escherichia coli CytR regulator belongs to the LacI family of
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and prevents CRP-mediated transcription in
the CytR regulon. Unlike the other members of this protein family, CytR binds
with only modest affinity to its operators and transcription repression thus
relies on the formation of nucleoprotein complexes with the cAMP-CRP complex.
Moreover, CytR exhibits a rotational and translational flexibility in operator
binding that is unprecedented in the LacI family. In this report we examined the 
effect of changing the spacing between CytR half-operators on CytR regulation in 
vivo and on CytR binding in vitro. Maximum repression was seen with the short
spacing variants: repression peaks when the half-operators lie on the same face
of the DNA helix. Repression was retained for most spacing variants with centre
separations of half-operators < or = 3 helical turns. Our data confirm and extend
the view that CytR is a highly flexible DNA binder that can adapt many different 
conformations for co-operative binding with CRP. Furthermore, limited proteolysis
of radiolabelled CytR protein showed that the interdomain linker connecting the
DNA binding domains and the core part of CytR does not become structured upon DNA
binding. We conclude that CytR does not use hinge alpha-helices for minor groove 
recognition. Rather, CytR possesses a highly flexible interdomain linker that
allows it to form complexes with CRP at promoters with quite different
architecture.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.00655.x 
PMID: 9466254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (nagE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 1991 Aug;173(15):4862-76.

The malX malY operon of Escherichia coli encodes a novel enzyme II of the
phosphotransferase system recognizing glucose and maltose and an enzyme
abolishing the endogenous induction of the maltose system.

Reidl J(1), Boos W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Federal Republic of Germany.

Mutants lacking MalK, a subunit of the binding protein-dependent
maltose-maltodextrin transport system, constitutively express the maltose genes. 
A second site mutation in malI abolishes the constitutive expression. The malI
gene (at 36 min on the linkage map) codes for a typical repressor protein that is
homologous to the Escherichia coli LacI, GalR, or CytR repressor (J. Reidl, K.
Römisch, M. Ehrmann, and W. Boos, J. Bacteriol. 171:4888-4899, 1989). We now
report that MalI regulates an adjacent and divergently oriented operon containing
malX and malY. MalX encodes a protein with a molecular weight of 56,654, and the 
deduced amino acid sequence of MalX exhibits 34.9% identity to the enzyme II of
the phosphototransferase system for glucose (ptsG) and 32.1% identity to the
enzyme II for N-acetylglucosamine (nagE). When constitutively expressed, malX can
complement a ptsG ptsM double mutant for growth on glucose. Also, a delta malE
malT(Con) strain that is unable to grow on maltose due to its maltose transport
defect becomes Mal+ after introduction of malI::Tn10 and the plasmid carrying
malX. MalX-mediated transport of glucose and maltose is likely to occur by
facilitated diffusion. We conclude that malX encodes a phosphotransferase system 
enzyme II that can recognize glucose and maltose as substrates even though these 
sugars may not represent the natural substrates of the system. The second gene in
the operon, malY, encodes a protein of 43,500 daltons. Its deduced amino acid
sequence exhibits weak homology to aminotransferase sequences. The presence of
plasmid-encoded MalX alone was sufficient for complementing growth on glucose in 
a ptsM ptsG glk mutant, and the plasmid-encoded MalY alone was sufficient to
abolish the constitutivity of the mal genes in a malK mutant. The overexpression 
of malY in a strain that is wild type with respect to the maltose genes strongly 
interferes with growth on maltose. This is not the case in a malT(Con) strain
that expresses the mal genes constitutively. We conclude that malY encodes an
enzyme that degrades the inducer of the maltose system or prevents its synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.15.4862-4876.1991 
PMCID: PMC208166
PMID: 1856179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degP) AND (degP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Aug 30:AAC0100421. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01004-21.
[Epub ahead of print]

OmpF Downregulation Mediated by Sigma E or OmpR Activation Confers Cefalexin
Resistance in Escherichia coli in the Absence of Acquired β-Lactamases.

Alzayn M(1)(2), Dulyayangkul P(1), Satapoomin N(1), Heesom KJ(3), Avison MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)University of Bristol Proteomics Facility, Bristol, UK.

Cefalexin is a widely used 1st generation cephalosporin, and resistance in
Escherichia coli is caused by Extended-Spectrum (e.g., CTX-M) and AmpC
β-lactamase production and therefore frequently coincides with 3rd generation
cephalosporin resistance. However, we have recently identified large numbers of
E. coli isolates from human infections, and from cattle, where cefalexin
resistance is not β-lactamase mediated. Here we show, by studying laboratory
selected mutants, clinical isolates, and isolates from cattle, that OmpF porin
disruption or downregulation is a major cause of cefalexin resistance in E. coli.
Importantly, we identify multiple regulatory mutations that cause OmpF
downregulation. In addition to mutation of ompR, already known to downregulate
OmpF and OmpC porin production, we find that rseA mutation, which strongly
activates the Sigma E regulon, greatly increasing DegP production, which degrades
OmpF, OmpC and OmpA. Furthermore, we reveal that mutations affecting
lipopolysaccharide structure, exemplified by the loss of GmhB, essential for
lipopolysaccharide heptosylation, also modestly activate DegP production,
resulting in OmpF degradation. Remarkably, given the critical importance attached
to such systems for normal E. coli physiology, we find evidence for DegP-mediated
OmpF downregulation, gmhB and rseA loss of function mutation in E. coli isolates 
derived from human infections. Finally, we show that these regulatory mutations
enhance the ability of group 1 CTX-M β-lactamase to confer reduced carbapenem
susceptibility, particularly those mutations that cause OmpC in addition to OmpF 
downregulation.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01004-21 
PMID: 34460299 


2. Molecules. 2021 May 7;26(9). pii: 2742. doi: 10.3390/molecules26092742.

Computational Design of Novel Allosteric Inhibitors for Plasmodium falciparum
DegP.

Shehzad S(1), Pandey R(1), Malhotra P(2), Gupta D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Bioinformatics Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Malaria Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi 110067, India.

The serine protease, DegP exhibits proteolytic and chaperone activities,
essential for cellular protein quality control and normal cell development in
eukaryotes. The P. falciparum DegP is essential for the parasite survival and
required to combat the oscillating thermal stress conditions during the
infection, protein quality checks and protein homeostasis in the
extra-cytoplasmic compartments, thereby establishing it as a potential target for
drug development against malaria. Previous studies have shown that diisopropyl
fluorophosphate (DFP) and the peptide SPMFKGV inhibit E. coli DegP protease
activity. To identify novel potential inhibitors specific to PfDegP allosteric
and the catalytic binding sites, we performed a high throughput in silico
screening using Malaria Box, Pathogen Box, Maybridge library, ChEMBL library and 
the library of FDA approved compounds. The screening helped identify five best
binders that showed high affinity to PfDegP allosteric (T0873, T2823, T2801,
RJC02337, CD00811) and the catalytic binding site (T0078L, T1524, T2328, BTB11534
and 552691). Further, molecular dynamics simulation analysis revealed RJC02337,
BTB11534 as the best hits forming a stable complex. WaterMap and electrostatic
complementarity were used to evaluate the novel bio-isosteric chemotypes of
RJC02337, that led to the identification of 231 chemotypes that exhibited better 
binding affinity. Further analysis of the top 5 chemotypes, based on better
binding affinity, revealed that the addition of electron donors like nitrogen and
sulphur to the side chains of butanoate group are more favoured than the backbone
of butanoate group. In a nutshell, the present study helps identify novel, potent
and Plasmodium specific inhibitors, using high throughput in silico screening and
bio-isosteric replacement, which may be experimentally validated.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26092742 
PMCID: PMC8141111
PMID: 34066964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Apr 6;49(6):e32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1231.

Gene-specific mutagenesis enables rapid continuous evolution of enzymes in vivo.

Park H(1), Kim S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu,
Seoul 08826, South Korea.

Various in vivo mutagenesis methods have been developed to facilitate fast and
efficient continuous evolution of proteins in cells. However, they either modify 
the DNA region that does not match the target gene, or suffer from low mutation
rates. Here, we report a mutator, eMutaT7 (enhanced MutaT7), with very fast in
vivo mutation rate and high gene-specificity in Escherichia coli. eMutaT7, a
cytidine deaminase fused to an orthogonal RNA polymerase, can introduce up to ∼4 
mutations per 1 kb per day, rivalling the rate in typical in vitro mutagenesis
for directed evolution of proteins, and promotes rapid continuous evolution of
model proteins for antibiotic resistance and allosteric activation. eMutaT7
provides a very simple and tunable method for continuous directed evolution of
proteins, and suggests that the fusion of new DNA-modifying enzymes to the
orthogonal RNA polymerase is a promising strategy to explore the expanded
sequence space without compromising gene specificity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1231 
PMCID: PMC8034631
PMID: 33406230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2020 Dec 30;15(12):e0244031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244031.
eCollection 2020.

Characterization of ecotin homologs from Campylobacter rectus and Campylobacter
showae.

Thomas C(1), Nothaft H(2), Yadav R(3), Fodor C(2), Alemka A(2), Oni O(3), Bell
M(3), Rada B(3), Szymanski CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Complex Carbohydrate Research Center,
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia,
United States of America.

Ecotin, first described in Escherichia coli, is a potent inhibitor of a broad
range of serine proteases including those typically released by the innate immune
system such as neutrophil elastase (NE). Here we describe the identification of
ecotin orthologs in various Campylobacter species, including Campylobacter rectus
and Campylobacter showae residing in the oral cavity and implicated in the
development and progression of periodontal disease in humans. To investigate the 
function of these ecotins in vitro, the orthologs from C. rectus and C. showae
were recombinantly expressed and purified from E. coli. Using CmeA
degradation/protection assays, fluorescence resonance energy transfer and NE
activity assays, we found that ecotins from C. rectus and C. showae inhibit NE,
factor Xa and trypsin, but not the Campylobacter jejuni serine protease HtrA or
its ortholog in E. coli, DegP. To further evaluate ecotin function in vivo, an E.
coli ecotin-deficient mutant was complemented with the C. rectus and C. showae
homologs. Using a neutrophil killing assay, we demonstrate that the low survival 
rate of the E. coli ecotin-deficient mutant can be rescued upon expression of
ecotins from C. rectus and C. showae. In addition, the C. rectus and C. showae
ecotins partially compensate for loss of N-glycosylation and increased protease
susceptibility in the related pathogen, Campylobacter jejuni, thus implicating a 
similar role for these proteins in the native host to cope with the protease-rich
environment of the oral cavity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244031 
PMCID: PMC7773321
PMID: 33378351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


5. Commun Biol. 2020 Oct 1;3(1):547. doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-01266-9.

Over-activation of a nonessential bacterial protease DegP as an antibiotic
strategy.

Cho H(1), Choi Y(1), Min K(1), Son JB(1), Park H(1), Lee HH(1), Kim S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu,
Seoul, 08826, South Korea.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu,
Seoul, 08826, South Korea. seokheekim@snu.ac.kr.

Rising antibiotic resistance urgently begs for novel targets and strategies for
antibiotic discovery. Here, we report that over-activation of the periplasmic
DegP protease, a member of the highly conserved HtrA family, can be a viable
strategy for antibiotic development. We demonstrate that tripodal peptidyl
compounds that mimic DegP-activating lipoprotein variants allosterically activate
DegP and inhibit the growth of an Escherichia coli strain with a permeable outer 
membrane in a DegP-dependent fashion. Interestingly, these compounds inhibit
bacterial growth at a temperature at which DegP is not essential for cell
viability, mainly by over-proteolysis of newly synthesized proteins. Co-crystal
structures show that the peptidyl arms of the compounds bind to the
substrate-binding sites of DegP. Overall, our results represent an intriguing
example of killing bacteria by activating a non-essential enzyme, and thus expand
the scope of antibiotic targets beyond the traditional essential proteins or
pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01266-9 
PMCID: PMC7529758
PMID: 33005001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biosci Bioeng. 2021 Jan;131(1):33-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2020.09.001. Epub
2020 Sep 22.

Enhanced floc formation by degP-deficient Escherichia coli cells in the presence 
of glycerol.

Ojima Y(1), Honma H(2), Otsuka M(2), Matano S(2), Azuma M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry and Bioengineering, Graduate School of
Engineering, Osaka City University, 3-3-138 Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka
558-8585, Japan. Electronic address: ojima@osaka-cu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Applied Chemistry and Bioengineering, Graduate School of
Engineering, Osaka City University, 3-3-138 Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka
558-8585, Japan.

Flocculation is an aggregation phenomenon of microbial cells in which they form
flocs or flakes. In this study, it was found that addition of glycerol to a
complex glucose medium promoted spontaneous floc formation by an Escherichia coli
degP-deficient mutant strain (ΔdegP) in a dose-dependent manner. In the presence 
of 10% (v/v) glycerol, the amount of floc formation (quantified as floc protein) 
reached its maximum value (230 mg/L), five times that in its absence. 10% (v/v)
glycerol was the limit concentration that does not inhibit cell growth of ΔdegP
strain. Glycerol was not consumed by ΔdegP cells during floc formation. To
provide media having nearly the same viscosity as that containing 10% (v/v)
glycerol, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) or polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) were added 
to medium as viscosifying agents. Floc formation was not promoted by increasing
the medium viscosity with CMC or PVP. However, addition of ethylene glycol also
significantly promoted floc formation in the same manner as glycerol. Addition of
short-chain polyols decreased the number of viable ΔdegP cells in the floc
structure and enhanced outer membrane vesicle (OMV) production by ΔdegP cells;
polyols-induced damage on the outer membrane of ΔdegP cells may contribute to the
promoted floc formation.

Copyright © 2020 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2020.09.001 
PMID: 32972822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochem J. 2020 Aug 28;477(16):2949-2965. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200483.

Molecular mechanism of networking among DegP, Skp and SurA in periplasm for
biogenesis of outer membrane proteins.

Yang C(1)(2), Peng S(3), Chen C(3), Zhao XS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory for
Structural Chemistry of Unstable and Stable Species, and Department of Chemical
Biology, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China.
(2)Biomedical Pioneering Innovation Center (BIOPIC), Peking University, Beijing
100871, China.
(3)School of Life Science, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences,
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

The biogenesis of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) is an extremely challenging
process. In the periplasm of Escherichia coli, a group of quality control factors
work together to exercise the safe-guard and quality control of OMPs. DegP, Skp
and SurA are the three most prominent ones. Although extensive investigations
have been carried out, the molecular mechanism regarding the networking among
these proteins remains mostly mysterious. Our group has previously studied the
molecular interactions of OMPs with SurA and Skp, using single-molecule detection
(SMD). In this work, again using SMD, we studied how OmpC, a representative of
OMPs, interacts with DegP, Skp and SurA collectively. Several important
discoveries were made. The self-oligomerization of DegP to form hexamer occurs
over hundred micromolars. When OmpC is in a monomer state at a low concentration,
the OmpC·DegP6 and OmpC·DegP24 complexes form when the DegP concentration is
around sub-micromolars and a hundred micromolars, respectively. High OmpC
concentration promotes the binding affinity of DegP to OmpC by ∼100 folds. Skp
and SurA behave differently when they interact synergistically with DegP in the
presence of substrate. DegP can degrade SurA-protected OmpC, but Skp-protected
OmpC forms the ternary complex OmpC·(Skp3)n·DegP6 (n = 1,2) to resist the
DegP-mediated degradation. Combined with previous results, we were able to depict
a comprehensive picture regarding the molecular mechanism of the networking among
DegP, Skp and SurA in the periplasm for the OMPs biogenesis under physiological
and stressed conditions.

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200483 
PMID: 32729902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Biotechnol. 2020 May 11;20(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s12896-020-00615-0.

Translational regulation of periplasmic folding assistants and proteases as a
valuable strategy to improve production of translocated recombinant proteins in
Escherichia coli.

Gawin A(1), Ertesvåg H(1), Hansen SAH(1), Malmo J(2), Brautaset T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Sem Sælandsvei 6-8, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Vectron Biosolutions AS, Abels gt 5, N-7030, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Sem Sælandsvei 6-8, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway.
trygve.brautaset@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: Advantages of translocation of recombinant proteins to the periplasm 
in Escherichia coli include simplified downstream processing, and improved
folding and in vivo activity of the target protein. There are, however, problems 
encountered in the periplasmic production that can be associated with the
incorrect formation of disulfide bonds, incomplete cleavage of the signal
peptide, and proteolytic degradation. A common strategy used to overcome these
difficulties involves manipulating the cellular levels of proteases and
periplasmic folding assistants like chaperones, signal peptide peptidases or
thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases. To date, this has been achieved by plasmid-based
over-expression or knockouts of the relevant genes.
RESULTS: We changed the translation efficiencies of five native E. coli proteins,
DsbA, DsbB, Skp, SppA, and DegP, by modifying the strength of their ribosome
binding sites (RBS). The genomic RBS sequences were replaced with synthetic ones 
that provided a predicted translation initiation rate. Single- and double-gene
mutant strains were created and tested for production of two pharmaceutically
relevant proteins, PelB-scFv173-2-5-AP and OmpA-GM-CSF. Almost all the
single-gene mutant strains showed improved periplasmic production of at least one
of the recombinant proteins. No further positive effects were observed when the
mutations were combined.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirm that our strain engineering approach involving 
translational regulation of endogenous proteins, in addition to plasmid-based
methods, can be used to manipulate the cellular levels of periplasmic folding
assistants and proteases to improve the yields of translocated recombinant
proteins. The positive effects of SppA overexpression should be further
investigated in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1186/s12896-020-00615-0 
PMCID: PMC7216727
PMID: 32393331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Front Microbiol. 2020 Feb 4;11:111. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00111. eCollection
2020.

Heat and Pressure Resistance in Escherichia coli Relates to Protein Folding and
Aggregation.

Li H(1)(2), Mercer R(1), Behr J(3)(4), Heinzlmeir S(3), McMullen LM(1), Vogel
RF(5), Gänzle MG(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Institute of Quality Standard and Testing Technology for Agro-Products,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Key Laboratory of Agro-food Quality and
Safety, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing, China.
(3)Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Technical University of
Munich, Freising, Germany.
(4)Leibniz-Institute for Food Systems Biology, Technical University of Munich,
Freising, Germany.
(5)Technical University of Munich - Lehrstuhl fär Technische Mikrobiologie,
Freising, Germany.
(6)College of Bioengineering and Food Science, Hubei University of Technology,
Wuhan, China.

The locus of heat resistance (LHR) confers extreme heat resistance in Escherichia
coli. This study explored the role of the LHR in heat and pressure resistance of 
E. coli, as well as its relationship with protein folding and aggregation in
vivo. The role of LHR was investigated in E. coli MG1655 and the pressure
resistant E. coli LMM1010 expressing an ibpA-yfp fusion protein to visualize
inclusion bodies by fluorescence microscopy. The expression of proteins by the
LHR was determined by proteomic analysis; inclusion bodies of untreated and
treated cells were also analyzed by proteomics, and by fluorescent microscopy. In
total, 11 proteins of LHR were expressed: sHSP20, ClpKGI, sHSP, YdfX1 and YdfX2, 
HdeD, KefB, Trx, PsiE, DegP, and a hypothetical protein. The proteomic analysis
of inclusion bodies revealed a differential abundance of proteins related to
oxidative stress in strains carrying the LHR. The LHR reduced the presence of
inclusion bodies after heat or pressure treatment, indicating that proteins
expressed by the LHR prevent protein aggregation, or disaggregate proteins. This 
phenotype of the LHR was also conferred by expression of a fragment containing
only sHSP20, ClpKGI, and sHSP. The LHR and the fragment encoding only sHSP20,
ClpKGI, and sHSP also enhanced pressure resistance in E. coli MG1655 but had no
effect on pressure resistance of E. coli LMM1010. In conclusion, the LHR confers 
pressure resistance to some strains of E. coli, and reduces protein aggregation. 
Pressure and heat resistance are also dependent on additional LHR-encoded
functions.

Copyright © 2020 Li, Mercer, Behr, Heinzlmeir, McMullen, Vogel and Gänzle.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00111 
PMCID: PMC7010813
PMID: 32117137 


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Jan 21;117(3):1414-1418. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1918721117. Epub 2020 Jan 6.

Activation by substoichiometric inhibition.

Merdanovic M(1), Burston SG(2), Schmitz AL(1), Köcher S(1), Knapp S(3), Clausen
T(4), Kaiser M(1), Huber R(5)(6), Ehrmann M(5)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University
Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany.
(2)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Biomedical Sciences Building,
Bristol BS8 1TD, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University Frankfurt, 60438
Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(5)Center of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University
Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany; huber@biochem.mpg.de
michael.ehrmann@uni-due.de.
(6)Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(7)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3US, United Kingdom.

Startling reports described the paradoxical triggering of the human
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway when a small-molecule inhibitor
specifically inactivates the BRAF V600E protein kinase but not wt-BRAF. We
performed a conceptual analysis of the general phenomenon "activation by
inhibition" using bacterial and human HtrA proteases as models. Our data suggest 
a clear explanation that is based on the classic biochemical principles of
allostery and cooperativity. Although substoichiometric occupancy of inhibitor
binding sites results in partial inhibition, this effect is overrun by a
concomitant activation of unliganded binding sites. Therefore, when an inhibitor 
of a cooperative enzyme does not reach saturating levels, a common scenario
during drug administration, it may cause the contrary of the desired effect. The 
implications for drug development are discussed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1918721117 
PMCID: PMC6983408
PMID: 31907318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


############# ((degP) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Reversal of the ΔdegP phenotypes by a novel rpoE allele of Escherichia coli.

Leiser OP(1), Charlson ES, Gerken H, Misra R.

Author information: 
(1)The Microbial Genetics and Genomics Center, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, United States of America.

RseA sequesters RpoE (σ(E)) to the inner membrane of Escherichia coli when
envelope stress is low. Elevated envelope stress triggers RseA cleavage by the
sequential action of two membrane proteases, DegS and RseP, releasing σ(E) to
activate an envelope stress reducing pathway. Revertants of a ΔdegP ΔbamB strain,
which fails to grow at 37°C due to high envelope stress, harbored mutations in
the rseA and rpoE genes. Null and missense rseA mutations constitutively
hyper-activated the σ(E) regulon and significantly reduced the major outer
membrane protein (OMP) levels. In contrast, a novel rpoE allele, rpoE3, resulting
from the partial duplication of the rpoE gene, increased σ(E) levels greater than
that seen in the rseA mutant background but did not reduce OMP levels. A
σ(E)-dependent RybB::LacZ construct showed only a weak activation of the σ(E)
pathway by rpoE3. Despite this, rpoE3 fully reversed the growth and envelope
vesiculation phenotypes of ΔdegP. Interestingly, rpoE3 also brought down the
modestly activated Cpx envelope stress pathway in the ΔdegP strain to the wild
type level, showing the complementary nature of the σ(E) and Cpx pathways.
Through employing a labile mutant periplasmic protein, AcrA(L222Q), it was
determined that the rpoE3 mutation overcomes the ΔdegP phenotypes, in part, by
activating a σ(E)-dependent proteolytic pathway. Our data suggest that a
reduction in the OMP levels is not intrinsic to the σ(E)-mediated mechanism of
lowering envelope stress. They also suggest that under extreme envelope stress, a
tight homeostasis loop between RseA and σ(E) may partly be responsible for cell
death, and this loop can be broken by mutations that either lower RseA activity
or increase σ(E) levels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979 
PMCID: PMC3306311
PMID: 22439016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Genet Syst. 2009 Feb;84(1):15-24.

Suppression by enhanced RpoE activity of the temperature-sensitive phenotype of a
degP ssrA double mutant in Escherichia coli.

Ono K(1), Kutsukake K, Abo T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

SsrA is a small RNA playing a crucial role in trans-translation, which leads to
rescue of stalled ribosomes on or at the end of mRNA and addition of the
degradation tag to a growing polypeptide. The lack of SsrA has been shown to
enhance the temperature-sensitive (ts) phenotype of an E. coli strain defective
in the degP gene, which encodes one of the periplasmic proteases. This severe ts 
phenotype was relieved only partially by an SsrADD variant, which can lead to
ribosome rescue but adds a protease-resistant tag instead of the degradation tag,
suggesting that accumulation of polypeptides programmed by truncated mRNAs is
responsible for growth defect of the ssrA degP mutant. Expression of an
S210A-mutant DegP protein, which lacks the protease activity but retains the
chaperone activity, could relieve the ts phenotype of the double mutant,
suggesting that the chaperone activity but not the protease activity of DegP is
required for growth of the ssrA-deficient cells at high temperature.
Overexpression of the rpoE gene, which encodes sigmaE responsible for the
expression of factors involved in extracellular stress response, also suppressed 
the ts phenotype of the ssrA degP mutant. This suggests that the
stress-responsing pathway(s) may be involved in the enhancement of ts phenotype
of degP mutant in the absence of SsrA.

DOI: 10.1266/ggs.84.15 
PMID: 19420797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Oct;1758(10):1587-95. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

Verapamil, a Ca2+ channel inhibitor acts as a local anesthetic and induces the
sigma E dependent extra-cytoplasmic stress response in E. coli.

Andersen CL(1), Holland IB, Jacq A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Microbiologie, UMR 8621, Université Paris-Sud (XI),
Bâtiment 400, 91405 Orsay cedex, France.

Verapamil is used clinically as a Ca(2+) channel inhibitor for the treatment of
various disorders such as angina, hypertension and cardiac arrhythmia. Here we
study the effect of verapamil on the bacterium Escherichia coli. The drug was
shown to inhibit cell division at growth sub inhibitory concentrations,
independently of the SOS response. We show verapamil is a membrane active drug,
with similar effects to dibucaine, a local anesthetic. Thus, both verapamil and
dibucaine abolish the proton motive force and decrease the intracellular ATP
concentration. This is accompanied by induction of degP expression, as a result
of the activation of the RpoE (SigmaE) extra-cytoplasmic stress response, and
activation of the psp operon. Such effects of verapamil, as a membrane active
compound, could explain its general toxicity in eukaryotic cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.05.022 
PMID: 16836975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2005 May;187(10):3359-68.

Defective O-antigen polymerization in tolA and pal mutants of Escherichia coli in
response to extracytoplasmic stress.

Vinés ED(1), Marolda CL, Balachandran A, Valvano MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

We have previously shown that the TolA protein is required for the correct
surface expression of the Escherichia coli O7 antigen lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
In this work, delta tolA and delta pal mutants of E. coli K-12 W3110 were
transformed with pMF19 (encoding a rhamnosyltransferase that reconstitutes the
expression of O16-specific LPS), pWQ5 (encoding the Klebsiella pneumoniae O1 LPS 
gene cluster), or pWQ802 (encoding the genes necessary for the synthesis of
Salmonella enterica O:54). Both DeltatolA and delta pal mutants exhibited reduced
surface expression of O16 LPS as compared to parental W3110, but no significant
differences were observed in the expression of K. pneumoniae O1 LPS and S.
enterica O:54 LPS. Therefore, TolA and Pal are required for the correct surface
expression of O antigens that are assembled in a wzy (polymerase)-dependent
manner (like those of E. coli O7 and O16) but not for O antigens assembled by
wzy-independent pathways (like K. pneumoniae O1 and S. enterica O:54).
Furthermore, we show that the reduced surface expression of O16 LPS in delta tolA
and delta pal mutants was associated with a partial defect in O-antigen
polymerization and it was corrected by complementation with intact tolA and pal
genes, respectively. Using derivatives of W3110 delta tolA and W3110 delta pal
containing lacZ reporter fusions to fkpA and degP, we also demonstrate that the
RpoE-mediated extracytoplasmic stress response is upregulated in these mutants.
Moreover, an altered O16 polymerization was also detected under conditions that
stimulate RpoE-mediated extracytoplasmic stress responses in tol+ and pal+
genetic backgrounds. A Wzy derivative with an epitope tag at the C-terminal end
of the protein was stable in all the mutants, ruling out stress-mediated
proteolysis of Wzy. We conclude that the absence of TolA and Pal elicits a
sustained extracytoplasmic stress response that in turn reduces O-antigen
polymerization but does not affect the stability of the Wzy O-antigen polymerase.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.10.3359-3368.2005 
PMCID: PMC1112028
PMID: 15866920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Feb 16;231(2):227-35.

Regulation of htrA expression in Yersinia enterocolitica.

Heusipp G(1), Nelson KM, Schmidt MA, Miller VL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung,
Universitätsklinikum Münster, von-Esmarch-Strasse 56, 48149 Münster, Germany.
heusipp@uni-muenster.de

In Escherichia coli, envelope stress is regulated by the alternative sigma factor
sigma(E) and the two-component regulatory system CpxRA. Both systems overlap in
the transcriptional regulation of the htrA gene encoding a protease that degrades
misfolded proteins in the periplasm. In Yersinia enterocolitica, HtrA is
important for intracellular survival and full virulence in animal models. Here we
show that regulation of htrA expression in Y. enterocolitica is dependent on CpxR
and putatively also on RpoE. However, the stimuli inducing both systems were
different from E. coli. Most strikingly, we found that overproduction of an outer
membrane protein, a typical stimulus for the induction of htrA expression via
RpoE in E. coli, led to the induction of htrA expression via the Cpx system in Y.
enterocolitica. Interestingly, a Y. enterocolitica CpxR mutant strain was not
impaired for virulence in a mouse model of infection.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00962-5 
PMID: 14987769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Oct;26(2):209-21.

The HtrA family of serine proteases.

Pallen MJ(1), Wren BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, St Bartholomew's and the Royal London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, UK. m.pallen@qmw.ac.uk

HtrA, also known as DegP and probably identical to the Do protease, is a heat
shock-induced serine protease that is active in the periplasm of Escherichia
coli. Homologues of HtrA have been described in a wide range of bacteria and in
eukaryotes. Its chief role is to degrade misfolded proteins in the periplasm.
Substrate recognition probably involves the recently described PDZ domains in the
C-terminal half of HtrA and, we suspect, has much in common with the substrate
recognition system of the tail-specific protease, Prc (which also possesses a PDZ
domain). The expression of htrA is regulated by a complex set of signal
transduction pathways, which includes an alternative sigma factor, RpoE, an
anti-sigma factor, RseA, a two-component regulatory system, CpxRA, and two
phosphoprotein phosphatases, PrpA and PrpB. Mutations in the htrA genes of
Salmonella, Brucella and Yersinia cause decreased survival in mice and/or
macrophages, and htrA mutants can act as vaccines, as cloning hosts and as
carriers of heterologous antigens.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.5601928.x 
PMID: 9383148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 1995 May;177(10):2918-22.

The rpoE gene of Escherichia coli, which encodes sigma E, is essential for
bacterial growth at high temperature.

Hiratsu K(1), Amemura M, Nashimoto H, Shinagawa H, Makino K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Osaka University, Japan.

In vitro transcription analysis has shown that only RNA polymerase containing an 
alternative sigma subunit, sigma E, activates transcription from one of the rpoH 
promoters and the htrA promoter. The location of the rpoE gene encoding sigma E
on the Escherichia coli chromosome has recently been established, but no rpoE
mutant has yet become available for phenotypic testing. We cloned the rpoE gene
from the lambda-ordered clones of the E. coli genome and confirmed that the
reconstituted RNA polymerase containing the gene product (E sigma E) can
transcribe htrA in vitro. We constructed an rpoE-defective strain by gene
disruption using the cloned rpoE gene. We demonstrate that expression of htrA is 
completely dependent on the rpoE gene in vivo and that the rpoE gene is essential
for bacterial growth at high temperature.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.10.2918-2922.1995 
PMCID: PMC176969
PMID: 7751307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 1;14(5):1043-55.

The rpoE gene encoding the sigma E (sigma 24) heat shock sigma factor of
Escherichia coli.

Raina S(1), Missiakas D, Georgopoulos C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie Médicale, Centre Médical Universitaire, Genève,
Switzerland.

Previous work has established that the transcription factor sigma E (sigma 24) is
necessary for maintaining the induction of the heat shock response of Escherichia
coli at high temperatures. We have identified the gene encoding sigma E using a
genetic screen designed to isolate trans-acting mutations that abolish expression
from either htrA or rpoHP3, two promoters recognized uniquely by sigma
E-containing RNA polymerase. Such a screen was achieved by transducing strains
carrying a single copy of either phtrA-lacZ or rpoHP3-lacZ fusions with
mutagenized bacteriophage P1 lysates and screening for Lac- mutant colonies at 22
degrees C. Lac- mutants were subsequently tested for inability to grow at 43
degrees C (Ts- phenotype). Only those Lac- Ts- mutants that were unable to
accumulate heat shock proteins at 50 degrees C were retained for further
characterization. In a complementary approach, those genes which when cloned on a
multicopy plasmid led to higher constitutive expression of the sigma E regulon
were characterized and mapped. Both approaches identified the same gene, rpoE,
mapping at 55.5 min on the E.coli genetic map and encoding a polypeptide of 191
amino acid residues. The wild-type and a mutant rpoE gene products were
over-expressed and purified. It was found that the purified wild-type sigma E
protein, when used in in vitro run-off transcription assays in combination with
core RNA polymerase, was able to direct transcription from the htrA and rpoHP3
promoters, but not from known sigma 70-dependent promoters. In vivo and in vitro 
analyses of rpoE transcriptional regulation showed that the rpoE gene is
transcribed from two major promoters, one of which is positively regulated by
sigma E itself.


PMCID: PMC398177
PMID: 7889935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degQ) AND (degQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Nov 10;9(11). pii: E791. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9110791.

Development of Resistance in Escherichia coli ATCC25922 under Exposure of
Sub-Inhibitory Concentration of Olaquindox.

Gu Y(1)(2), Wang S(1)(2), Huang L(1)(2), Sa W(1), Li J(1), Huang J(1)(2), Dai
M(1), Cheng G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, China.
(2)MOA Laboratory for Risk Assessment of Quality and Safety of Livestock and
Poultry Products, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Quinoxaline1,4-di-N-oxides (QdNOs) are a class of important antibacterial drugs
of veterinary use, of which the drug resistance mechanism has not yet been
clearly explained. This study investigated the molecular mechanism of development
of resistance in Escherichia coli (E. coli) under the pressure of sub-inhibitory 
concentration (sub-MIC) of olaquindox (OLA), a representative QdNOs drug. In
vitro challenge of E. coli with 1/100× MIC to 1/2× MIC of OLA showed that the
bacteria needed a longer time to develop resistance and could only achieve low to
moderate levels of resistance as well as form weak biofilms. The transcriptomic
and genomic profiles of the resistant E. coli induced by sub-MIC of OLA
demonstrated that genes involved in tricarboxylic acid cycle, oxidation-reduction
process, biofilm formation, and efflux pumps were up-regulated, while genes
involved in DNA repair and outer membrane porin were down-regulated. Mutation
rates were significantly increased in the sub-MIC OLA-treated bacteria and the
mutated genes were mainly involved in the oxidation-reduction process, DNA
repair, and replication. The SNPs were found in degQ, ks71A, vgrG, bigA, cusA,
and DR76-4702 genes, which were covered in both transcriptomic and genomic
profiles. This study provides new insights into the resistance mechanism of QdNOs
and increases the current data pertaining to the development of bacterial
resistance under the stress of antibacterials at sub-MIC concentrations.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9110791 
PMCID: PMC7696260
PMID: 33182563 


2. J Med Life. 2019 Apr-Jun;12(2):184-191. doi: 10.25122/jml-2018-0049.

Bioinformatics analysis of various signal peptides for periplasmic expression of 
parathyroid hormone in E.coli.

Juibari AD(1), Ramezani S(1), Rezadoust MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran.

Hypoparathyroidism is a rare endocrine disease which is characterized by the
deficiency of serum calcium levels. RhPTH is prescribed as a therapy for the
management of refractory hypoparathyroidism. The aim of this study is to
investigate 32 signal peptides of gram-negative bacterial origin and evaluate
their potential for efficient secretion of recombinant human PTH (1-84)In E.coli 
to obtain higher expression of recombinant PTH in bacterial systems by using this
fusion partner. SignalP and ProtParam servers were employed to predict the
presence and location of signal peptide cleavage sites in protein sequence and
computation of various physical and chemical parameters of protein respectively. 
Also, SOLpro server was applied for prediction of the protein solubility. Then
ProtComp and SecretomeP online servers were employed to determine protein
location. The evaluations showed that theoretically two signal peptides
Lipopolysaccharide export system protein LptA (lptA) and Periplasmic pH-dependent
serine endoprotease DegQ (degQ) are the most appropriate signal peptides
examined. Due to the lack of post-translational modification in PTH, its
periplasmic expression has preferences. Based on the results of this study, using
bioinformatics and reliable servers signal peptides with appropriate secretory
potential can be obtained which lead to the highest expression level.

DOI: 10.25122/jml-2018-0049 
PMCID: PMC6685308
PMID: 31406522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell. 2019 Sep 5;75(5):1031-1042.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.06.015. Epub 
2019 Jul 18.

HokB Monomerization and Membrane Repolarization Control Persister Awakening.

Wilmaerts D(1), Dewachter L(1), De Loose PJ(1), Bollen C(1), Verstraeten N(1),
Michiels J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbiology, VIB, 3001 Leuven, Belgium; Centre of Microbial and
Plant Genetics, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Center for Microbiology, VIB, 3001 Leuven, Belgium; Centre of Microbial and
Plant Genetics, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
jan.michiels@kuleuven.vib.be.

Every bacterial population harbors a small subpopulation of so-called persisters 
that are transiently antibiotic tolerant. These persisters are associated with
the recalcitrance of chronic infections because they can recolonize the host
after antibiotic removal. Although several effectors have been described to
induce persistence, persister cell awakening is poorly understood. We previously 
reported that the toxin HokB induces persistence via pore formation, resulting in
membrane depolarization and ATP leakage. We now delineate mechanisms responsible 
for the awakening of HokB-induced persisters. We show that HokB dimerization by
the oxidoreductase DsbA is essential for pore formation and peptide stability.
Pores are disassembled via DsbC-mediated monomerization, which targets HokB for
DegQ-mediated degradation. Finally, pore disassembly allows membrane
repolarization by the electron transport chain, supporting cells to resume
growth. These results provide a detailed view of both the formation and awakening
of HokB-induced persister cells.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.06.015 
PMID: 31327636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEBS J. 2018 Sep;285(18):3525-3538. doi: 10.1111/febs.14627. Epub 2018 Aug 24.

DegP functions as a critical protease for bacterial acid resistance.

Fu X(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1)(2)(3), Shao H(1), Ma J(2), Song X(2), Zhang M(2), Chang 
Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Provincial University Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Response and Metabolic
Regulation, College of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou City,
Fujian Province, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)Engineering Research Center of Industrial Microbiology of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou City,
Fujian Province, China.

To counteract the lethal acid stress, bacteria explore such strategies as
cytoplasmic decarboxylase-catalyzed proton consumption and periplasmic
chaperone-assisted protein refolding. Here, we report a periplasmic
protease-mediated acid resistance mechanism in Escherichia coli. Deletion of the 
protease gene degP dramatically decreases the viability of late log or early
stationary phase cells against the extreme acid stress (pH 2.3), which can only
be minimally rescued by complementary expression of the protease-deficient
DegP(S210A) mutant protein. Similarly, DegQ, a homolog of DegP, also contributes 
to the bacterial acid resistance, but SurA as an important periplasmic chaperone 
hardly exhibits protection effect. In vitro studies reveal that DegP completely
loses its protease activity under acidic condition but is able to partially
reactivate upon neutralization. Importantly, we demonstrate the interaction of
DegP with typical cellular substrate proteins in cells during acid stress and/or 
recovery stages by using unnatural amino acid-mediated in vivo
photo-crosslinking, as well as the degradation of periplasmic proteins by DegP
during recovery after acidic denaturation. These data illustrate the role of DegP
in bacterial acid resistance conceivably via degrading those acid-induced
misfolded proteins. Our findings, together with earlier reports, suggest a
comprehensive acid resistance strategy adopted by bacteria such that in the
ATP-deficient extra-cytoplasm, the inevitable misfolded proteins induced by acid 
stress are refolded by a chaperone (e.g., HdeA/HdeB) and/or cleaved by a protease
(e.g., DegP/DegQ) while in the cytoplasm excessive protons are directly consumed 
or exported.

© 2018 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14627 
PMID: 30085413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Protein Expr Purif. 2018 Aug;148:9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.03.012. Epub 2018 
Mar 27.

Improved inducible expression of Bacillus naganoensis pullulanase from
recombinant Bacillus subtilis by enhancer regulation.

Deng Y(1), Nie Y(2), Zhang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Xu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
(2)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
Electronic address: ynie@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(3)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China;
State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 1800
Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China; 2011 Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety
and Nutrition, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
Electronic address: yxu@jiangnan.edu.cn.

Pullulanase is crucial to the specific hydrolysis of branch points in amylopectin
and is generally employed as an important enzyme in the starch-processing
industry. Recombinant Bacillus subtilis that employs an inducible promoter would 
be a suitable candidate for pullulanase expression because of its safety and
controllable production, but its level of pullulanase activity is relatively low.
In this study, we investigated the effect of the enhancers DegQ, DegU, and DegS
on pullulanase expression in a recombinant B. subtilis inducible system. The
genes degQ, degU, and degS were introduced to the recombinant plasmid
pMA0911-PsacB-pul harboring the promoter PsacB, signal peptide LipA, and gene
encoding pullulanase. The regulatory effects of the enhancers involved in
recombinant plasmids on pullulanase expression level were evaluated in B.
subtilis WB600 and WB800, respectively. The positive regulation of DegQ toward
pullulanase expression was detected from B. subtilis WB800, leading to a 60%
increase in enzyme activity. In addition, enzyme activity was further enhanced by
inserting the degQ gene to the position closer to the promoter PsacB.
Consequently, pullulanase activity reached 26.5 U ml-1 from the B. subtilis
WB800/pMA0911-PsacB- pul-degQ(N) after expression optimization, which was a
5.9-fold increase compared to that of the original strain B. subtilis
WB800/pMA0911-PsacB-pul. Hence, the inducible expression of the enzyme was
efficiently enhanced by regulating the enhancer DegQ from recombinant B. subtilis
WB800.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.03.012 
PMID: 29596990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. EMBO J. 2018 Apr 13;37(8). pii: e97825. doi: 10.15252/embj.201797825. Epub 2018
Mar 7.

Transmembrane redox control and proteolysis of PdeC, a novel type of c-di-GMP
phosphodiesterase.

Herbst S(1), Lorkowski M(1), Sarenko O(1), Nguyen TKL(1), Jaenicke T(1), Hengge
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany regine.hengge@hu-berlin.de.

The nucleotide second messenger c-di-GMP nearly ubiquitously promotes bacterial
biofilm formation, with enzymes that synthesize and degrade c-di-GMP being
controlled by diverse N-terminal sensor domains. Here, we describe a novel class 
of widely occurring c-di-GMP phosphodiesterases (PDE) that feature a periplasmic 
"CSS domain" with two highly conserved cysteines that is flanked by two
transmembrane regions (TM1 and TM2) and followed by a cytoplasmic EAL domain with
PDE activity. Using PdeC, one of the five CSS domain PDEs of Escherichia coli
K-12, we show that DsbA/DsbB-promoted disulfide bond formation in the CSS domain 
reduces PDE activity. By contrast, the free thiol form is enzymatically highly
active, with the TM2 region promoting dimerization. Moreover, this form is
processed by periplasmic proteases DegP and DegQ, yielding a highly active
TM2 + EAL fragment that is slowly removed by further proteolysis. Similar redox
control and proteolysis was also observed for a second CSS domain PDE, PdeB. At
the physiological level, CSS domain PDEs modulate production and supracellular
architecture of extracellular matrix polymers in the deeper layers of mature
E. coli biofilms.

© 2018 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201797825 
PMCID: PMC5897775
PMID: 29514851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Commun Signal. 2016 Dec 8;14(1):30.

HtrA-mediated E-cadherin cleavage is limited to DegP and DegQ homologs expressed 
by gram-negative pathogens.

Abfalter CM(1), Schubert M(1), Götz C(1), Schmidt TP(1), Posselt G(1), Wessler
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Paris-Lodron
University of Salzburg, Billroth Str. 11, A-5020, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Division of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Paris-Lodron
University of Salzburg, Billroth Str. 11, A-5020, Salzburg, Austria.
silja.wessler@sbg.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: The serine proteases HtrA/DegP secreted by the human gastrointestinal
pathogens Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) and Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni)
cleave the mammalian cell adhesion protein E-cadherin to open intercellular
adhesions. A wide range of bacteria also expresses the HtrA/DegP homologs DegQ
and/or DegS, which significantly differ in structure and function.
METHODS: E-cadherin shedding was investigated in infection experiments with the
Gram-negative pathogens H. pylori, enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC),
Salmonella enterica subsp. Enterica (S. Typhimurium), Yersinia enterocolitica (Y.
enterocolitica), and Proteus mirabilis (P. mirabilis), which express different
combinations of HtrAs. Annotated wild-type htrA/degP, degQ and degS genes were
cloned and proteolytically inactive mutants were generated by a serine-to-alanine
exchange in the active center. All HtrA variants were overexpressed and purified 
to compare their proteolytic activities in casein zymography and in vitro
E-cadherin cleavage experiments.
RESULTS: Infection of epithelial cells resulted in a strong E-cadherin ectodomain
shedding as reflected by the loss of full length E-cadherin in whole cell lysates
and formation of the soluble 90 kDa extracellular domain of E-cadherin (NTF) in
the supernatants of infected cells. Importantly, comparing the caseinolytic and
E-cadherin cleavage activities of HtrA/DegP, DegQ and DegS proteins revealed that
DegP and DegQ homologs from H. pylori, S. Typhimurium, Y. enterocolitica, EPEC
and P. mirabilis, but not activated DegS, cleaved E-cadherin as a substrate in
vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that E-cadherin cleavage is confined to
HtrA/DegP and DegQ proteins representing an important prevalent step in bacterial
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-016-0153-y 
PMCID: PMC5146865
PMID: 27931258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Mar;70(5):761-75. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1076-4. Epub
2012 Jul 18.

Architecture and regulation of HtrA-family proteins involved in protein quality
control and stress response.

Hansen G(1), Hilgenfeld R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
University of Lübeck, 23538, Lübeck, Germany. hansen@biochem.uni-luebeck.de

Protein quality control is vital for all living cells and sophisticated molecular
mechanisms have evolved to prevent the excessive accumulation of unfolded
proteins. High-temperature requirement A (HtrA) proteases have been identified as
important ATP-independent quality-control factors in most species. HtrA proteins 
harbor a serine-protease domain and at least one peptide-binding PDZ domain to
ensure efficient removal of misfolded or damaged proteins. One distinctive
property of HtrAs is their ability to assemble into complex oligomers. Whereas
all examined HtrAs are capable of forming pyramidal 3-mers, higher-order
complexes consisting of up to 24 molecules have been reported. Tight control of
chaperone and protease function is of pivotal importance in preventing
deleterious HtrA-protease activity. In recent years, structural biology provided 
detailed insights into the molecular basis of the regulatory mechanisms, which
include unique intramolecular allosteric signaling cascades and the dynamic
switching of oligomeric states of HtrA proteins. Based on these results,
functional models for many family members have been developed. The HtrA protein
family represents a remarkable example of how structural and functional diversity
is attained from the assembly of simple molecular building blocks.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-012-1076-4 
PMID: 22806565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degS) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biology (Basel). 2020 Oct 3;9(10). pii: E323. doi: 10.3390/biology9100323.

Characterisation and Mutagenesis Study of An Alternative Sigma Factor Gene (hrpL)
from Erwinia mallotivora Reveal Its Central Role in Papaya Dieback Disease.

Tamizi AA(1), Abu-Bakar N(1), Samsuddin AF(2), Rozano L(1), Ahmad-Redzuan R(1),
Abdul-Murad AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agri-Omics and Bioinformatics Programme, Biotechnology and Nanotechnology
Research Centre, Malaysian Agricultural Research and Development Institute
Headquarters, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi 43600, Selangor, Malaysia.

The alternative sigma (σ) factor E, RpoE or HrpL, has been reported to be
involved in stress- and pathogenicity-related transcription initiation in
Escherichia coli and many other Gram-negative bacteria, including Erwinia spp.
and Pseudomonas spp. A previous study identified the hrpL/rpoE transcript as one 
of the significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during early E.
mallotivora infection in papaya and those data serve as the basis of the current 
project. Here, the full coding DNA sequence (CDS) of hrpL from E. mallotivora
(EmhrpL) was determined to be 549 bp long, and it encoded a 21.3 kDa HrpL protein
that possessed two highly conserved sigma-70 (σ70) motifs-σR2 and σR4. Nucleotide
sequence alignment revealed the hrpL from E. mallotivora shared high sequence
similarity to rpoE/hrpL from E. tracheiphila (83%), E. pyrifoliae (81%), and E.
tasmaniensis (80%). Phylogenetics analysis indicated hrpL from E. mallotivora to 
be monophyletic with rpoEs/hrpLs from Pantoea vagans, E. herbicola, and E.
tracheiphila. Structural analysis postulated that the E. mallotivora's
alternative σ factor was non-transmembranic and was an extracytoplasmic function 
(ECF) protein-characteristics shared by other σ factors in different bacterial
species. Notably, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) study through molecular
docking suggested the σ factor could be possibly inhibited by an anti-σ. Finally,
a knockout of hrpL in E. mallotivora (ΔEmhrpL) resulted in avirulence in
four-month-old papaya plants. These findings have revealed that the hrpL is a
necessary element in E. mallotivora pathogenicity and also predicted that the
gene can be inhibited by an anti-σ.

DOI: 10.3390/biology9100323 
PMCID: PMC7600996
PMID: 33023069 


2. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e79520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079520. eCollection
2013.

DegS and RseP homologous proteases are involved in singlet oxygen dependent
activation of RpoE in Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Nuss AM(1), Adnan F, Weber L, Berghoff BA, Glaeser J, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Giessen University, Giessen, 
Germany ; Department of Molecular Infection Biology, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

Singlet oxygen ((1)O2) is the main agent of photooxidative stress and is
generated by photosensitizers as (bacterio)chlorophylls. It leads to the damage
of cellular macromolecules and therefore photosynthetic organisms have to mount
an adaptive response to (1)O2 formation. A major player of the photooxidative
stress response in Rhodobacter sphaeroides is the alternative sigma factor RpoE, 
which is inactivated under non-stress conditions by its cognate anti-sigma factor
ChrR. By using random mutagenesis we identified RSP_1090 to be required for full 
activation of the RpoE response under (1)O2 stress, but not under organic
peroxide stress. In this study we show that both RSP_1090 and RSP_1091 are
required for full resistance towards (1)O2. Moreover, we revealed that the DegS
and RseP homologs RSP_3242 and RSP_2710 contribute to (1)O2 resistance and
promote ChrR proteolysis. The RpoE signaling pathway in R. sphaeroides is
therefore highly similar to that of Escherichia coli, although very different
anti-sigma factors control RpoE activity. Based on the acquired results, the
current model for RpoE activation in response to (1)O2 exposure in R. sphaeroides
was extended.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079520 
PMCID: PMC3818230
PMID: 24223961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Reversal of the ΔdegP phenotypes by a novel rpoE allele of Escherichia coli.

Leiser OP(1), Charlson ES, Gerken H, Misra R.

Author information: 
(1)The Microbial Genetics and Genomics Center, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, United States of America.

RseA sequesters RpoE (σ(E)) to the inner membrane of Escherichia coli when
envelope stress is low. Elevated envelope stress triggers RseA cleavage by the
sequential action of two membrane proteases, DegS and RseP, releasing σ(E) to
activate an envelope stress reducing pathway. Revertants of a ΔdegP ΔbamB strain,
which fails to grow at 37°C due to high envelope stress, harbored mutations in
the rseA and rpoE genes. Null and missense rseA mutations constitutively
hyper-activated the σ(E) regulon and significantly reduced the major outer
membrane protein (OMP) levels. In contrast, a novel rpoE allele, rpoE3, resulting
from the partial duplication of the rpoE gene, increased σ(E) levels greater than
that seen in the rseA mutant background but did not reduce OMP levels. A
σ(E)-dependent RybB::LacZ construct showed only a weak activation of the σ(E)
pathway by rpoE3. Despite this, rpoE3 fully reversed the growth and envelope
vesiculation phenotypes of ΔdegP. Interestingly, rpoE3 also brought down the
modestly activated Cpx envelope stress pathway in the ΔdegP strain to the wild
type level, showing the complementary nature of the σ(E) and Cpx pathways.
Through employing a labile mutant periplasmic protein, AcrA(L222Q), it was
determined that the rpoE3 mutation overcomes the ΔdegP phenotypes, in part, by
activating a σ(E)-dependent proteolytic pathway. Our data suggest that a
reduction in the OMP levels is not intrinsic to the σ(E)-mediated mechanism of
lowering envelope stress. They also suggest that under extreme envelope stress, a
tight homeostasis loop between RseA and σ(E) may partly be responsible for cell
death, and this loop can be broken by mutations that either lower RseA activity
or increase σ(E) levels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979 
PMCID: PMC3306311
PMID: 22439016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Phytopathology. 2011 Feb;101(2):271-80. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-10-0076.

Mutation of a degS homologue in Enterobacter cloacae decreases colonization and
biological control of damping-off on cucumber.

Roberts DP(1), Lohrke SM, McKenna L, Lakshman DK, Kong H, Lydon J.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture - Agriculture Research Service,
Beltsville, MD, USA. dan.roberts@ars.usda.gov

We have been using mutagenesis to determine how biocontrol bacteria such as
Enterobacter cloacae 501R3 deal with complex nutritional environments found in
association with plants. E. cloacae C10, a mutant of 501R3 with a transposon
insertion in degS, was diminished in growth on synthetic cucumber root exudate
(SRE), colonization of cucumber seed and roots, and control of damping-off of
cucumber caused by Pythium ultimum. DegS, a periplasmic serine protease in the
closely related bacterium Escherichia coli K12, is required for the RpoE-mediated
stress response. C10 containing wild-type degS from 501R3 or from E. coli K12 on 
pBeloBAC11 was significantly increased in growth on SRE, colonization of cucumber
roots, and control of P. ultimum relative to C10 containing pBeloBAC11 alone. C10
and 501R3 were similar in sensitivity to acidic conditions, plant-derived
phenolic compounds, oxidative stress caused by hydrogen peroxide, dessication,
and high osmoticum; stress conditions potentially associated with plants. This
study demonstrates a role for degS in the spermosphere and rhizosphere during
colonization and disease control by Enterobacter cloacae. This study implicates, 
for the first time, the involvement of DegS and, by extension, the RpoE-mediated 
stress response, in reducing stress on E. cloacae resulting from the complex
nutritional environments in the spermosphere and rhizosphere.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-10-0076 
PMID: 20942652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Nov;62(3):838-52. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Loss of Hfq activates the sigmaE-dependent envelope stress response in Salmonella
enterica.

Figueroa-Bossi N(1), Lemire S, Maloriol D, Balbontín R, Casadesús J, Bossi L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Ubiquitous RNA-binding protein Hfq mediates the regulatory activity of many small
RNAs (sRNAs) in bacteria. To identify potential targets for Hfq-mediated
regulation in Salmonella, we searched for lacZ translational fusions whose
activity varied in the presence or absence of Hfq. Fusions downregulated by Hfq
were more common than fusions showing the opposite response. Surprisingly, in a
subset of isolates from the major class, the higher activity in the absence of
Hfq was due to transcriptional activation by the alternative sigma factor RpoE
(sigmaE). Activation of the sigmaE regulon normally results from envelope stress 
conditions that elicit proteolytic cleavage of the anti-sigmaE factor RseA. Using
an epitope tagged variant of RseA, we found that RseA is cleaved at an increased 
rate in a strain lacking Hfq. This cleavage was dependent on the DegS protease
and could be completely prevented upon expressing the hfq gene from an inducible 
promoter. Thus, loss of Hfq function appears to affect envelope biogenesis in a
way that mimics a stress condition and thereby induces the sigmaE response
constitutively. In a RseA mutant, activation of the sigmaE response causes
Hfq-dependent downregulation of outer membrane protein (OMP) genes including
lamB, ompA, ompC and ompF. For ompA, downregulation results in part from
sigmaE-dependent accumulation of MicA (SraD), a small RNA recently shown to
downregulate ompA transcript levels in stationary phase. We show that the micA
gene is under sigmaE control, and that DegS-mediated sigmaE release is required
for the accumulation of MicA RNA upon entry into stationary phase. A similar
mechanism involving additional, still unidentified, sRNAs, might underlie the
growth phase-dependent regulation of other OMP mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05413.x 
PMID: 16999834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Infect Immun. 2005 Jan;73(1):459-63.

Effect of inactivation of degS on Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium in
vitro and in vivo.

Rowley G(1), Stevenson A, Kormanec J, Roberts M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Comparative Medicine, Professor of Molecular Bacteriology,
Department of Veterinary Pathology, Glasgow University Veterinary School,
Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, United Kingdom. m.roberts@vet.gla.ac.uk

The alternative sigma factor (RpoE sigma(E)) enables Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium to adapt to stressful conditions, such as oxidative stress, nutrient 
deprivation, and growth in mammalian tissues. Infection of mice by Salmonella
serovar Typhimurium also requires sigma(E). In Escherichia coli, activation of
the sigma(E) pathway is dependent on proteolysis of the anti-sigma factor RseA
and is initiated by DegS. DegS is also important in order for E. coli to cause
extraintestinal infection in mice. We constructed a degS mutant of the serovar
Typhimurium strain SL1344 and compared its behavior in vitro and in vivo with
those of its wild-type (WT) parent and an isogenic rpoE mutant. Unlike E. coli
degS strains, the Salmonella serovar Typhimurium degS strain grew as well as the 
WT strain at 42 degrees C. The degS mutant survived very poorly in murine
macrophages in vitro and was highly attenuated compared with the WT strain for
both the oral and parenteral routes of infection in mice. However, the degS
mutant was not as attenuated as the serovar Typhimurium rpoE mutant: 100- to
1,000-fold more degS bacteria than rpoE bacteria were present in the livers and
spleens of mice 24 h after intraperitoneal challenge. In most assays, the rpoE
mutant was more severely affected than the degS mutant and a sigma(E)-dependent
reporter gene was more active in the degS mutant than the rpoE strain. These
findings indicate that degS is important for activation of the sigma(E) pathway
in serovar Typhimurium but that alternative pathways for sigma(E) activation
probably exist.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.1.459-463.2005 
PMCID: PMC538943
PMID: 15618185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 15;16(16):2147-55.

YaeL (EcfE) activates the sigma(E) pathway of stress response through a site-2
cleavage of anti-sigma(E), RseA.

Kanehara K(1), Ito K, Akiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Escherichia coli YaeL (EcfE) is a homolog of human site-2 protease (S2P), a
membrane-bound zinc metalloprotease involved in regulated intramembrane
proteolysis. We have shown previously that YaeL, having essential metalloprotease
active site motifs in the cytoplasmic domain, is indispensable for viability.
Here, we obtained rpoE, encoding an extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor
(sigma(E)), as a multicopy suppressor against the yaeL disruption. Whereas
sigma(E) is thought to be activated by regulated cleavage of RseA on the
periplasmic side by the DegS protease, we found that a degradation intermediate
of RseA consisting of the transmembrane and the cytoplasmic domains accumulated
in the YaeL-depleted cells. This intermediate was degraded on expression of YaeL 
but not of its metalloprotease motif mutants. Cells depleted of YaeL were
incapable of activating a sigma(E)-dependent promoter in response to an envelope 
stress. It is suggested that sigma(E) activation involves two successive
proteolytic cleavages: first, at a periplasmic site by DegS; second, at a
cytoplasmic or intramembrane site by YaeL. Thus, YaeL is positively required for 
the sigma(E) extracytoplasmic stress response.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1002302 
PMCID: PMC186437
PMID: 12183368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((dnaA) AND (gyrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2005 Jun;99(6):603-10.

Organization and localization of the dnaA and dnaK gene regions on the
multichromosomal genome of Burkholderia multivorans ATCC 17616.

Nagata Y(1), Matsuda M, Komatsu H, Imura Y, Sawada H, Ohtsubo Y, Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Sendai
980-8577, Japan. aynaga@ige.tohoku.ac.jp

The Burkholderia multivorans strain ATCC 17616 carries three circular chromosomes
with sizes of 3.4, 2.5, and 0.9 Mb. To reveal the distribution and organization
of the genes for fundamental cell functions on the genome of this bacterium, the 
dnaA and dnaK gene regions of ATCC 17616 were cloned and characterized. The gene 
organization of the dnaA region was rnpA-rmpH-dnaA-dnaN-gyrB with a single
consensus DnaA-binding box (TTATCCACA) between the rmpH and dnaA genes. This
intergenic region, however, did not work as an autonomously replicating sequence 
in ATCC 17616. On the other hand, the gene organization of the dnaK region was
grpE-orf1 (gene for thioredoxin homologue)-dnaK-dnaJ-pabB (gene for
p-aminobenzoate synthetase component homologue). A putative heat-shock promoter
that showed good homology to the sigma32-dependent promoter consensus sequence in
Escherichia coli was found upstream of the grpE gene, suggesting that these five 
genes constitute an operon. In M9 succinate minimal medium the dnaJ mutant grew
more slowly than the wild-type strain, indicating that this operon is functional.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and Southern blot analyses indicated that both
the dnaA and dnaK gene regions exist as single copies on the 3.4 Mb chromosome.

DOI: 10.1263/jbb.99.603 
PMID: 16233838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Jun;68(6):2924-33.

oriC region and replication termination site, dif, of the Xanthomonas campestris 
pv. campestris 17 chromosome.

Yen MR(1), Lin NT, Hung CH, Choy KT, Weng SF, Tseng YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

A 13-kb DNA fragment containing oriC and the flanking genes thdF, orf900, yidC,
rnpA, rpmH, oriC, dnaA, dnaN, recF, and gyrB was cloned from the gram-negative
plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris 17. These genes are
conserved in order with other eubacterial oriC genes and code for proteins that
share high degrees of identity with their homologues, except for orf900, which
has a homologue only in Xylella fastidiosa. The dnaA/dnaN intergenic region (273 
bp) identified to be the minimal oriC region responsible for autonomous
replication has 10 pure AT clusters of four to seven bases and only three
consensus DnaA boxes. These findings are in disagreement with the notion that
typical oriCs contain four or more DnaA boxes located upstream of the dnaA gene. 
The X. campestris pv. campestris 17 attB site required for site-specific
integration of cloned fragments from filamentous phage phiLf replicative form DNA
was identified to be a dif site on the basis of similarities in nucleotide
sequence and function with the Escherichia coli dif site required for chromosome 
dimer resolution and whose deletion causes filamentation of the cells. The oriC
and dif sites were located at 12:00 and 6:00, respectively, on the circular X.
campestris pv. campestris 17 chromosome map, similar to the locations found for
E. coli sites. Computer searches revealed the presence of both the dif site and
XerC/XerD recombinase homologues in 16 of the 42 fully sequenced eubacterial
genomes, but eight of the dif sites are located far away from the 6:00 point
instead of being placed opposite the cognate oriC. The differences in the
relative position suggest that mechanisms different from that of E. coli may
participate in the control of chromosome replication.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.6.2924-2933.2002 
PMCID: PMC123971
PMID: 12039751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(16):4860-5.

Conserved promoter motif is required for cell cycle timing of dnaX transcription 
in Caulobacter.

Keiler KC(1), Shapiro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

Cells use highly regulated transcriptional networks to control temporally
regulated events. In the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus, many cellular
processes are temporally regulated with respect to the cell cycle, and the genes 
required for these processes are expressed immediately before the products are
needed. Genes encoding factors required for DNA replication, including dnaX,
dnaA, dnaN, gyrB, and dnaK, are induced at the G(1)/S-phase transition. By
analyzing mutations in the dnaX promoter, we identified a motif between the -10
and -35 regions that is required for proper timing of gene expression. This
motif, named RRF (for repression of replication factors), is conserved in the
promoters of other coordinately induced replication factors. Because mutations in
the RRF motif result in constitutive gene expression throughout the cell cycle,
this sequence is likely to be the binding site for a cell cycle-regulated
transcriptional repressor. Consistent with this hypothesis, Caulobacter extracts 
contain an activity that binds specifically to the RRF in vitro.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.16.4860-4865.2001 
PMCID: PMC99540
PMID: 11466289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 1;29(11):2251-9.

Identification of a putative chromosomal replication origin from Helicobacter
pylori and its interaction with the initiator protein DnaA.

Zawilak A(1), Cebrat S, Mackiewicz P, Król-Hulewicz A, Jakimowicz D, Messer W,
Gosciniak G, Zakrzewska-Czerwinska J.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Weigla 12, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.

The key elements of the initiation of Helicobacter pylori chromosome replication,
DnaA protein and putative oriC region, have been characterized. The gene
arrangement in the H.pylori dnaA region differs from that found in many other
eubacterial dnaA regions (rnpA-rmpH-dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB). Helicobacter pylori
dnaA is flanked by two open reading frames with unknown function, while dnaN-gyrB
and rnpA-rmpH loci are separated from the dnaA gene by 600 and 90 kb,
respectively. We show that the dnaA gene encoding initiator protein DnaA is
expressed in H.pylori cells. The H.pylori DnaA protein, like other DnaA proteins,
can be divided into four domains. Here we demonstrate that the C-terminal domain 
of H.pylori DnaA protein is responsible for DNA binding. Using in silico and in
vitro studies, the putative oriC region containing five DnaA boxes has been
located upstream of the dnaA gene. DNase I and gel retardation analyses show that
the C-terminal domain of H.pylori DnaA protein specifically binds each of five
DnaA boxes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.11.2251 
PMCID: PMC55718
PMID: 11376143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1999 Jun;63(6):1134-7.

Replication origin region of the chromosome of alkaliphilic Bacillus halodurans
C-125.

Takami H(1), Masui N, Nakasone K, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Deep-sea Microorganisms Research Group, Japan Marine Science and Technology
Center, Kanagawa, Japan. takamih@jamstec.go.jp

An 18.5-kb DNA fragment containing the oriC region of the chromosome of the
alkaliphilic Bacillus halodurans C-125 was obtained by PCR and sequenced. Sixteen
open reading frames (ORFs) were identified in this region. A sequencing
similarity search using the BSORF database found that ORF1 to 13 all had
significant similarities to gene products of Bacillus subtilis. Three other ORFs 
(ORF14-16) of unknown function were positioned down-stream of gyrB instead of
rrnO, which is found in the same region in the case of B. subtilis. The ORF
organization from gidA to gyrA was the same as that of B. subtilis. The gene
organization and the location of the DnaA-box region were also similar to those
of the chromosomes of other bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas
putida. There were two DnaA-box clusters (Box-region C and R) with a consensus
sequence TTATCCACA on both sides of the dnaA gene but another DnaA box cluster
(Box-region L) which is found in the region between thdF and jag in B. subtilis
was not found in the corresponding region in the case of alkaliphilic Bacillus
halodurans C-125.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.63.1134 
PMID: 10427704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Microbiol. 1998 Mar;36(3):158-63.

Sequence analysis of a 34.7-kb DNA segment from the genome of Buchnera aphidicola
(endosymbiont of aphids) containing groEL, dnaA, the atp operon, gidA, and rho.

Clark MA(1), Baumann L, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA.

Buchnera aphidicola is a prokaryotic endosymbiont of the aphid Schizaphis
graminum. From past and present nucleotide sequence analyses of the B. aphidicola
genome, we have assembled a 34. 7-kilobase (kb) DNA segment. This segment
contains genes coding for 32 open reading frames (ORFs), which corresponded to
89.9% of the DNA. All of these ORFs could be identified with homologous regions
of the Escherichia coli genome. The order of the genes with established functions
was groELS-trmE-rnpA-rpmH-dnaA-dnaN-gyrB-atpCDGAH FEB-gidA-fdx-hscA-
hscB-nifS-ilvDC-rep-trxA-rho. The order of genes in small DNA fragments was
conserved in both B. aphidicola and E. coli. Most of these fragments were in
approximately the same region of the E. coli genome. The latter organism,
however, contained many additional inserted genes within and between the
fragments. The results of the B. aphidicola genome analyses indicate that the
endosymbiont has many properties of free-living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00006760 
PMID: 9516544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. DNA Res. 1996 Dec 31;3(6):415-9.

Structure of the dnaA region of the endosymbiont, Buchnera aphidicola, of aphid
Schizaphis graminum.

Hassan AK(1), Moriya S, Baumann P, Yoshikawa H, Ogasawara N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan.

Buchnera aphidicola is an intracellular prokaryote (endosymbiont) that lives in
the body cavity of the aphid. Phylogenetic studies indicated that it is closely
related to Escherichia coli and members of Enterobacteria. The gene order of the 
region containing the dnaA gene is well conserved in many bacteria. Seven genes
of the endosymbiont of the aphid Schizaphis graminum, gyrB, dnaN, dnaA, rpmH,
rnpA, yidD, and 60K. were found to be homologous in sequence and relative
location to those of E. coli. We have further sequenced the region downstream of 
the 60K gene to elucidate the boundary of the conserved region, and found that
one more gene, thdF, is conserved. The comparison of gene organizations of the
dnaA region of the related bacteria supported the close phylogenetic relationship
of B. aphidicola to E. coli. In addition, we have identified groES and groEL
genes next to the thdF gene. GroEL protein was reported to be expressed at an
elevated level in the endosymbionts of aphids, and is considered to play an
important role in their association with the aphid host. Comparison of the
structure of the groE operon with that of the endosymbiont of the aphid
Acyrthosiphon pisum revealed the conservation of a sequence resembling the E.
coli consensus heat shock promoter, and this sequence may be responsible for the 
high expression of the groEL gene in aphid endosymbionts.

DOI: 10.1093/dnares/3.6.415 
PMID: 9097044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Apr;20(2):283-93.

Organization of the origins of replication of the chromosomes of Mycobacterium
smegmatis, Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium tuberculosis and isolation of a
functional origin from M. smegmatis.

Salazar L(1), Fsihi H, de Rossi E, Riccardi G, Rios C, Cole ST, Takiff HE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones
Científicas (IVIC), Caracas, Venezuela.

The genus Mycobacterium is composed of species with widely differing growth rates
ranging from approximately three hours in Mycobacterium smegmatis to two weeks in
Mycobacterium leprae. As DNA replication is coupled to cell duplication, it may
be regulated by common mechanisms. The chromosomal regions surrounding the
origins of DNA replication from M. smegmatis, M. tuberculosis, and M. leprae have
been sequenced, and show very few differences. The gene order,
rnpA-rpmH-dnaA-dnaN-recF-orf-gyrB-gyrA, is the same as in other Gram-positive
organisms. Although the general organization in M. smegmatis is very similar to
that of Streptomyces spp., a closely related genus, M. tuberculosis and M. leprae
differ as they lack an open reading frame, between dnaN and recF, which is
similar to the gnd gene of Escherichia coli. Within the three mycobacterial
species, there is extensive sequence conservation in the intergenic regions
flanking dnaA, but more variation from the consensus DnaA box sequence was seen
than in other bacteria. By means of subcloning experiments, the putative
chromosomal origin of replication of M. smegmatis, containing the dnaA-dnaN
region, was shown to promote autonomous replication in M. smegmatis, unlike the
corresponding regions from M. tuberculosis or M. leprae.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1996.tb02617.x 
PMID: 8733228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Gen Genet. 1995 Mar 20;246(6):680-6.

Nucleotide sequence of the recF gene cluster from Staphylococcus aureus and
complementation analysis in Bacillus subtilis recF mutants.

Alonso JC(1), Fisher LM.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Gen Genet. 1995 Sep 20;248(5):635-6.

We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a 3.5 kb segment in the recF region
of the Staphylococcus aureus chromosome. The gene order at this locus,
dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB is similar to that found in the replication origin region of 
many other bacteria. S. aureus RecF protein (predicted molecular mass 42.3 kDa), 
has 57% amino acid sequence identity with the Bacillus subtilis RecF protein
(42.2 kDa), but only 26% with the Escherichia coli RecF protein (40.5 kDa). We
have shown that the S. aureus recF gene partially complements the defect of a B. 
subtilis recF mutant, but does not complement an E. coli recF strain. The amino
acid sequence alignment of seven available RecF proteins (five of them from
bacteria of gram-negative origin) allowed us to identify eight highly conserved
regions (alpha to theta) and to predict five new conserved regions within the
gram-positive group (a to f). We suggest that the basic mechanism of homologous
recombination is conserved among free-living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00290713 
PMID: 7898435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gene. 1994 Jul 22;145(1):17-24.

An improved vector system for constructing transcriptional lacZ fusions: analysis
of regulation of the dnaA, dnaN, recF and gyrB genes of Escherichia coli.

Macián F(1), Pérez-Roger I, Armengod ME.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Citológicas, Fundación Valenciana de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Valencia, Spain.

We describe a new vector system for the in vitro construction of transcriptional 
fusions to the lacZ gene, which is expressed from the translational start signals
of galK. The galK ribosome-binding site (RBS) and its natural preceding region
ensure a constant efficiency for lacZ translation and, thus, the
beta-galactosidase (beta Gal) production of a given fusion is directly
proportional to the in vivo transcriptional activity of the inserted DNA
fragment. Single-copy lambda prophage versions of multicopy constructs can be
made by in vivo recombination. We use this system to compare the transcriptional 
activities of the promoters present in the dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB cluster. The order
of strength of these promoters is gyrB > dnaA > recF > dnaN. It is assumed that
gyrB belongs to the dnaA-dnaN-recF operon, because the short recF-gyrB
intercistronic region does not contain a terminator. By using this new vector
system, we have detected strong termination signals within recF that are
functional even when recF is translated at its normal rate. The low level of
transcription coming to the end of recF, and the highest activity of the gyrB
promoter, as well as results obtained with several gyrB::lacZ translational
fusions, support the conclusion that gyrB is predominantly expressed from its own
promoter under standard growth conditions. Finally, we have found that
transcription from the dnaA promoters is constant at different growth rates. This
supports the idea that autoregulation of the dnaA gene is responsible for the
coupling of the DnaA protein synthesis to cell mass increase, and accumulation of
DnaA protein governs the initiation of chromosome replication.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90317-4 
PMID: 8045420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ebgR) AND (ebgR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Chem Biol. 2005 Dec;12(12):1291-300.

High-throughput screening of enzyme libraries: in vitro evolution of a
beta-galactosidase by fluorescence-activated sorting of double emulsions.

Mastrobattista E(1), Taly V, Chanudet E, Treacy P, Kelly BT, Griffiths AD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2005 Dec;12(12):1255-7.

We describe a completely in vitro high-throughput screening system for directed
evolution of enzymes based on in vitro compartmentalization (IVC). Single genes
are transcribed and translated inside the aqueous droplets of a water-in-oil
emulsion. Enzyme activity generates a fluorescent product and, after conversion
into a water-in-oil-in-water double emulsion, fluorescent droplets are sorted
using a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS). Earlier in vivo studies have
demonstrated that Ebg, a protein of unknown function, can evolve to allow
Escherichia coli lacking the lacZ beta-galactosidase gene to grow on lactose.
Here we demonstrate that we can evolve Ebg into an enzyme with significant
beta-galactosidase activity in vitro. Only two specific mutations were ever seen 
to provide this improvement in Ebg beta-galactosidase activity in vivo. In
contrast, nearly all the improved beta-galactosidases selected in vitro resulted 
from different mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2005.09.016 
PMID: 16356846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genetica. 2003 Jul;118(2-3):143-56.

The EBG system of E. coli: origin and evolution of a novel beta-galactosidase for
the metabolism of lactose.

Hall BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Hutchinson Hall, River Campus, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14627-0211, USA. drbh@mail.rochester.edu

The EBG system of E. coli has served as a model for the evolution of novel
functions. This paper reviews the experimental evolution of the catabolism of
beta-galactoside sugars in strains of E. coli that carry deletions of the
classical lacZ beta-galactosidase gene. Evolution of the ebgA encoded Ebg
beta-galactosidase for an expanded substrate range, evolution of the ebgR encoded
Ebg repressor for sensitivity to an expanded range of inducers, the amino acid
replacements responsible for those changes, and the evolutionary potential of the
system are discussed. The EBG system has also served as a model for studying the 
detailed catalytic consequences of experimental evolution at the
physical-chemical level. The analysis of free-energy profiles for the wildtype
and all of the various evolved Ebg enzymes has permitted rejection of the
Albery-Knowles hypothesis that relates likely changes in free-energy profiles to 
evolutionary change.


PMID: 12868605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Nov 1;28(21):E93.

Interactions of Escherichia coli RNA with bacteriophage MS2 coat protein: genomic
SELEX.

Shtatland T(1), Gill SC, Javornik BE, Johansson HE, Singer BS, Uhlenbeck OC,
Zichi DA, Gold L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

Genomic SELEX is a method for studying the network of nucleic acid-protein
interactions within any organism. Here we report the discovery of several
interesting and potentially biologically important interactions using genomic
SELEX. We have found that bacteriophage MS2 coat protein binds several
Escherichia coli mRNA fragments more tightly than it binds the natural,
well-studied, phage mRNA site. MS2 coat protein binds mRNA fragments from rffG
(involved in formation of lipopolysaccharide in the bacterial outer membrane),
ebgR (lactose utilization repressor), as well as from several other genes.
Genomic SELEX may yield experimentally induced artifacts, such as molecules in
which the fixed sequences participate in binding. We describe several methods
(annealing of oligonucleotides complementary to fixed sequences or switching
fixed sequences) to eliminate some, or almost all, of these artifacts. Such
methods may be useful tools for both randomized sequence SELEX and genomic SELEX.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.21.e93 
PMCID: PMC113162
PMID: 11058143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1999 Feb;181(4):1149-55.

Spectra of spontaneous growth-dependent and adaptive mutations at ebgR.

Hall BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester, Rochester, New York. drbh@uhura.cc.rochester.edu

A comparison of the spectra of spontaneous growth-dependent and adaptive
mutations in ebgR shows that both spectra are dominated by insertion sequence
(IS)-mediated mutations. The difference between growth-dependent mutations (61%
IS mediated) and adaptive mutations (80% IS mediated) is highly significant (P < 
0.0001). In contrast, the spectra of growth-dependent and adaptive
non-IS-mediated mutations do not differ from each other and therefore do not
provide support for the hypothesis that adaptive and growth-dependent mutations
arise by substantially different mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.4.1149-1155.1999 
PMCID: PMC93491
PMID: 9973340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(11):2862-5.

Adaptive mutagenesis at ebgR is regulated by PhoPQ.

Hall BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627-0211,
USA. drbh@uhura.cc.rochester.edu

Adaptive mutations are mutations that occur in nondividing or very slowly
dividing microbial cells during prolonged nonlethal selection and that are
specific to the challenge of the selection in the sense that the only mutations
that can be detected are those that provide a growth advantage to the cell. The
phoPQ genes encode a two-component positively acting regulatory system that
controls expression of at least 25 to 30 genes in Escherichia coli and Salmonella
typhimurium. PhoPQ responds to a variety of environmental stress signals
including Mg2+ starvation and nutritional deprivation. Here I show that
disruption of phoP or phoQ by Tn10dCam significantly reduces the adaptive
mutation rate to ebgR, indicating that the adaptive mutagenesis machinery is
regulated, directly or indirectly, by phoPQ. The finding that it is regulated
implies that adaptive mutagenesis does not simply result from a failure of
various error correction mechanisms during prolonged starvation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.11.2862-2865.1998 
PMCID: PMC107250
PMID: 9603873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5669-73.

Adaptive mutations in Escherichia coli as a model for the multiple mutational
origins of tumors.

Hall BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Rochester, NY 14627, USA.

The cells in most tumors are found to carry multiple mutations; however, based
upon mutation rates determined by fluctuation tests, the frequency of such
multiple mutations should be so low that tumors are never detected within human
populations. Fluctuation tests, which determine the cell-division-dependent
mutation rate per cell generation in growing cells, may not be appropriate for
estimating mutation rates in nondividing or very slowly dividing cells. Recent
studies of time-dependent, "adaptive" mutations in nondividing populations of
microorganisms suggest that similar measurements may be more appropriate to
understanding the mutation origins of tumors. Here I use the ebgR and ebgA genes 
of Escherichia coli to measure adaptive mutation rates where multiple mutations
are required for rapid growth. Mutations in either ebgA or ebgR allow very slow
growth on lactulose (4-O-beta-D-galactosyl-D-fructose), with doubling times of
3.2 and 17.3 days, respectively. However, when both mutations are present, cells 
can grow rapidly with doubling times of 2.7 hr. I show that during prolonged
(28-day) selection for growth on lactulose, the number of lactulose-utilizing
mutants that accumulate is 40,000 times greater than can be accounted for on the 
basis of mutation rates measured by fluctuation tests, but is entirely consistent
with the time-dependent adaptive mutation rates measured under the same
conditions of prolonged selection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.12.5669 
PMCID: PMC41758
PMID: 7777567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genetics. 1989 Dec;123(4):635-48.

DNA sequence analysis of artificially evolved ebg enzyme and ebg repressor genes.

Hall BG(1), Betts PW, Wootton JC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs 06268.

Erratum in
    Genetics 1990 Mar;124(3):791.

The ebg system has been used as a model to study the artificial selection of new 
catalytic functions of enzymes and of inducer specificities of repressors. A
series of mutant enzymes with altered catalytic specificities were previously
characterized biochemically as were the changes in inducer specificities of
mutant, but fully functional, repressors. The wild type ebg operon has been
sequenced, and the sequence differences of the mutant enzymes and repressors have
been determined. We now report that, contrary to our previous understanding, ebg 
enzyme contains 180-kD alpha-subunits and 20-kD beta-subunits, both of which are 
required for full activity. Mutations that dramatically affect substrate
specificity and catalytic efficiency lie in two distinct regions, both well
outside of the active site region. Mutations that affect inducer specificity of
the ebg repressor lie within predicted sugar binding domains. Comparisons of the 
ebg beta-galactosidase and repressor with homologous proteins of the Escherichia 
coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae lac operons, and with the galactose operon
repressor, suggest that the ebg and lac operons diverged prior to the divergence 
of E. coli from Klebsiella. One case of a triple substitution as the consequence 
of a single event is reported, and the implications of that observation for
mechanisms of spontaneous mutagenesis are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/123.4.635 
PMCID: PMC1203876
PMID: 2515108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Biol Evol. 1985 Nov;2(6):478-83.

Sequence of the ebgR gene of Escherichia coli: evidence that the EBG and LAC
operons are descended from a common ancestor.

Stokes HW(1), Hall BG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs
06268.

The sequence of ebgR, the gene that encodes the EBG repressor, was determined.
There is 44% DNA sequence identity between ebgR and lacI, the gene that encodes
the LAC repressor. There is also 25% identity between the amino acid sequence of 
lacI and the deduced amino acid sequence of ebgR. The sequence of 596 bp distal
to ebgA, the structural gene for EBG beta-galactosidase, was also determined.
Within that region there were two sequences, 74 and 100 bp long, that showed 46% 
and 50% identity, respectively, to sequences in the first 600 bp of lacY, the
structural gene for the lactose permease. The organization and direction of
transcription of the repressor and structural genes of the two operons are
identical. Taken together with the homology between ebgA and lacZ (as
demonstrated in the companion article in this issue), this provides strong
evidence that the EBG and LAC operons are descended from a common ancestor. The
map position of these two operons supports the notion that these operons diverged
following a genome duplication event in an ancestor of Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040373 
PMID: 3939708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genetics. 1980 Dec;96(4):1007-17.

On the evolution of new metabolic functions in diploid organisms.

Hall BG.

Evolution of lactose utilization via the ebg system of Escherichia coli requires 
both structural gene (ebgA) and regulatory gene (ebgR) mutations. Because
evolution of new metabolic functions in diploids might be subject to constraints 
not present in haploid organisms, merodiploid strains carrying a wild-type and an
evolved ebgA allele, or a wild-type and an evolved ebgR allele were constructed. 
I show that heterozygosity at ebgA does not significantly affect the selective
advantage of the evolved ebgA allele; whereas heterozygosity at ebgR eliminates
the selective advantage of the evolved ebgR allele. Is is suggested that, in
diploid organisms, evolution of new functions for systems under negative control 
would be very difficult.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/96.4.1007 
PMCID: PMC1219299
PMID: 6790336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genetics. 1978 Dec;90(4):673-81.

Regulation of newly evolved enzymes. IV. Directed evolution of the Ebg repressor.

Hall BG.

In Escherichia coli, the wild-type repressor of ebg (evolved beta-galactosidase) 
enzyme synthesis, specified by the ebgR+ gene, responds very weakly to lactulose 
(fructose-beta-D-galactopyranoside). Selection for a functional repressor that
responds strongly to lactulose as an inducer reveals the existence of ebgR+L
mutants, which occur spontaneously at a frequency of about 2 X 10(-10) . EBGR+L
mutants are pleiotropic in that they specify ebg repressor with a greatly
increased response to lactulose, lactose, galactose-arabinoside and
methyl-galactoside as inducers. Selection of ebgR+L mutants is discussed within
the framework of directed evolution of a regulatory function.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/90.4.673 
PMCID: PMC1213912
PMID: 105963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((envR) AND (acrR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Sep;190(18):6276-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.00190-08. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

AcrS/EnvR represses expression of the acrAB multidrug efflux genes in Escherichia
coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Takumi-Kobayashi A, Theisen U, Hirata T, Nishino K, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

The acrS regulatory gene is located upstream of the acrEF multidrug efflux system
genes. However, the roles of AcrS in regulation of drug efflux pumps have not
been clearly understood. Here we show that AcrS represses other multidrug efflux 
genes, acrAB, which encode a major efflux system in Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00190-08 
PMCID: PMC2546796
PMID: 18567659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1995 Nov;177(21):6111-7.

Regulation of jadomycin B production in Streptomyces venezuelae ISP5230:
involvement of a repressor gene, jadR2.

Yang K(1), Han L, Vining LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dallhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The nucleotide sequence of a region upstream of the type II polyketide synthase
genes in the cluster for biosynthesis of the polyketide antibiotic jadomycin B in
Streptomyces venezuelae contained an open reading frame encoding a sequence of
196 amino acids that resembeled sequences deduced for a group of repressor
proteins. The strongest similarity was to EnvR of Escherichia coli, but the
sequence also resembled MtrR, AcrR, TetC, and TcmR, all of which are involved in 
regulating resistance to antibiotics or toxic hydrophobic substances in the
environment. Disruption of the nucleotide sequence of this putative S. venezuelae
repressor gene (jadR2), by insertion of an apramycin resistance gene at an
internal MluI site, and replacement of the chromosomal gene generated mutants
that produced jadomycin B without the stress treatments (exposure to heat shock
or to toxic concentrations of ethanol) required for jadomycin B production by the
wild type. When cultures of the disruption mutants were ethanol stressed, they
overproduced the antibiotic. From these results it was concluded that expression 
of the jadomycin B biosynthesis genes are negatively regulated by jadR2.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.21.6111-6117.1995 
PMCID: PMC177450
PMID: 7592375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecI) AND (fecI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100673. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673. Epub 2021
Apr 16.

The Escherichia coli S2P intramembrane protease RseP regulates ferric citrate
uptake by cleaving the sigma factor regulator FecR.

Yokoyama T(1), Niinae T(2), Tsumagari K(2), Imami K(2), Ishihama Y(2), Hizukuri
Y(3), Akiyama Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yhizukur@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yakiyama@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Escherichia coli RseP, a member of the site-2 protease family of intramembrane
proteases, is involved in the activation of the σE extracytoplasmic stress
response and elimination of signal peptides from the cytoplasmic membrane.
However, whether RseP has additional cellular functions is unclear. In this
study, we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis to search 
for new substrates that might reveal unknown physiological roles for RseP. Our
data showed that the levels of several Fec system proteins encoded by the
fecABCDE operon (fec operon) were significantly decreased in an RseP-deficient
strain. The Fec system is responsible for the uptake of ferric citrate, and the
transcription of the fec operon is controlled by FecI, an alternative sigma
factor, and its regulator FecR, a single-pass transmembrane protein. Assays with 
a fec operon expression reporter demonstrated that the proteolytic activity of
RseP is essential for the ferric citrate-dependent upregulation of the fec
operon. Analysis using the FecR protein and FecR-derived model proteins showed
that FecR undergoes sequential processing at the membrane and that RseP
participates in the last step of this sequential processing to generate the
N-terminal cytoplasmic fragment of FecR that participates in the transcription of
the fec operon with FecI. A shortened FecR construct was not dependent on RseP
for activation, confirming this cleavage step is the essential and sufficient
role of RseP. Our study unveiled that E. coli RseP performs the intramembrane
proteolysis of FecR, a novel physiological role that is essential for regulating 
iron uptake by the ferric citrate transport system.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673 
PMCID: PMC8144685
PMID: 33865858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


2. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00541-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00541-19. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Ferric Citrate Regulator FecR Is Translocated across the Bacterial Inner Membrane
via a Unique Twin-Arginine Transport-Dependent Mechanism.

Passmore IJ(1), Dow JM(1), Coll F(1), Cuccui J(1), Palmer T(2), Wren BW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom brendan.wren@lshtm.ac.uk.

In Escherichia coli, citrate-mediated iron transport is a key nonheme pathway for
the acquisition of iron. Binding of ferric citrate to the outer membrane protein 
FecA induces a signal cascade that ultimately activates the cytoplasmic sigma
factor FecI, resulting in transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport 
genes. Central to this process is signal transduction mediated by the inner
membrane protein FecR. FecR spans the inner membrane through a single
transmembrane helix, which is flanked by cytoplasm- and periplasm-orientated
moieties at the N and C termini. The transmembrane helix of FecR resembles a
twin-arginine signal sequence, and the substitution of the paired arginine
residues of the consensus motif decouples the FecR-FecI signal cascade, rendering
the cells unable to activate transcription of the fec operon when grown on ferric
citrate. Furthermore, the fusion of beta-lactamase C-terminal to the FecR
transmembrane helix results in translocation of the C-terminal domain that is
dependent on the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) system. Our findings
demonstrate that FecR belongs to a select group of bitopic inner membrane
proteins that contain an internal twin-arginine signal sequence.IMPORTANCE Iron
is essential for nearly all living organisms due to its role in metabolic
processes and as a cofactor for many enzymes. The FecRI signal transduction
pathway regulates citrate-mediated iron import in many Gram-negative bacteria,
including Escherichia coli The interactions of FecR with the outer membrane
protein FecA and cytoplasmic anti-sigma factor FecI have been extensively
studied. However, the mechanism by which FecR inserts into the membrane has not
previously been reported. In this study, we demonstrate that the targeting of
FecR to the cytoplasmic membrane is dependent on the Tat system. As such, FecR
represents a new class of bitopic Tat-dependent membrane proteins with an
internal twin-arginine signal sequence.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00541-19 
PMCID: PMC7148137
PMID: 32015149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00058-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00058-20. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Novel Tat-Dependent Protein Secretion.

Braun V(1), Hantke K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Department of Protein
Evolution, Tübingen, Germany volkmar.braun@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(2)IMID Institute, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The transcription initiation signal elicited by the binding of ferric citrate to 
the outer membrane FecA protein is transmitted by the FecR protein across the
cytoplasmic membrane to the FecI extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor. In
this issue of Journal of Bacteriology, I. J. Passmore, J. M. Dow, F. Coll, J.
Cuccui, et al. (J Bacteriol 202:e00541-19, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00541-19) report that the FecR sequence contains both 
the twin-arginine signal motif and the secretory (Sec) avoidance motif typical of
proteins secreted by the twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system. The same study
shows that FecR is indeed secreted by Tat and represents a new class of bitopic
Tat-dependent membrane proteins.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00058-20 
PMCID: PMC7148135
PMID: 32015148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Bioengineered. 2015;6(5):307-11. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2015.1069449. Epub 2015
Jul 28.

Indirect positive effects of a sigma factor RpoN deletion on the lactate-based
polymer production in Escherichia coli.

Kadoya R(1)(2), Kodama Y(1), Matsumoto K(1), Taguchi S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Biotechnology and Macromolecular Chemistry; Graduate School of
Engineering; Hokkaido University ; Kita-ku, Sapporo , Japan.
(2)b CREST; JST; Sanbancho ; Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo , Japan.

The production of bacterial polyesters, polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), has been
improved by several rational approaches such as overexpression and/or engineering
of the enzymes directly related to PHA biosynthetic pathways. In this study, a
new approach at transcription level has been applied to a new category of the
copolymer of lactate (LA) and 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB), P(LA-co-3HB). When the 4
disrupting mutants of sigma factors in Escherichia coli, rpoN, rpoS, fliA, fecI, 
were used as platforms for production of P(LA-co-3HB), increases in the
production level and LA fraction of the copolymer were observed for the mutant
strain with rpoN disruption. These positive impacts on the polymer production
were caused in an "indirect manner" via changes in the multiple genes governed by
RpoN. A genome-wide engineering by sigma factors would be a versatile approach
for the production of value-added products of interest and available for
combination with the other beneficial tools.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2015.1069449 
PMCID: PMC4825821
PMID: 26218242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Environ Microbiol. 2013 Dec;15(12):3121-9. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12236. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Sigma factors in a thousand E. coli genomes.

Cook H(1), Ussery DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, The
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs, Lyngby, Denmark.

Everyone working with bacterial genomics is familiar with the phrase 'too much
data'. In this Genome Update, we discuss two methods for helping to deal with
this explosion of genomic information. First, we introduce the concept of
calculating a quality score for each sequenced genome, and second, we describe a 
method to quickly sort through genomes for a particular set of protein families. 
We apply these two methods to all of the current Escherichia coli genomes
available in the The National Center for Biotechnology Information database. Out 
of the 2074 E. coli/Shigella genomes listed (June, 2013), only less than half
(983) are of sufficient quality to use in comparative genomic work.
Unfortunately, even some of the 'complete' E. coli genomes are in pieces, and a
few 'draft' genomes are good quality. Six of the seven known sigma factors in
E. coli strain K-12 are extremely well conserved; the iron-regulating sigma
factor FecI (σ(19) ) is missing in most genomes. Surprisingly, the E. coli strain
CFT073 genome does not encode a functional RpoD (σ(70) ), which is obviously
essential, and this is likely due to poor genome assembly/annotation. We find a
possible novel sigma factor present in more than a hundred E. coli genomes.

© 2013 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12236 
PMID: 23992563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Res Microbiol. 2011 Jun;162(5):461-9. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2011.03.005. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

Negative regulation of σ(70)-driven promoters by σ(70).

Ionescu M(1), Elgrably-Weiss M, Elad T, Rasouly A, Yagur-Kroll S, Belkin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, The Alexander Silberman
Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra
Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. mionescu@berkeley.edu

The Escherichia coli yjbEFGH operon, encoding genes involved in exopolysaccharide
production, has previously been shown to be induced by osmotic stress and to be
negatively regulated by σ(38). Promoter analysis suggested that like most E. coli
genes, its transcription is driven by the housekeeping sigma factor σ(70).
Indeed, manipulation of any of the other five alternative sigma factors did not
affect its induction by osmotic stress. Surprisingly, when assayed in a strain
expressing low levels of σ(70), yjbEFGH induction in response to osmotic stress
was higher than in a strain expressing normal levels of σ(70). Similar phenomena 
were observed in the σ(70)-driven promoters of sulA, uvrA, recA, fecI, entC and
lacZ, the transcription of which is directly controlled by a repressor protein
(LexA, Fur and LacI), but not in promoters of the housekeeping genes ftsA and
ftsY, or in σ(38)-driven treA promoter. Since transcription factors are generally
present in the cell in low numbers, we hypothesize that a decrease in σ(70), that
drives the expression of lexA, fur and lacI as well, further diminishes their
number in the cell and thus de-represses the induction of genes which are
subjected to their repression.

Copyright © 2011 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2011.03.005 
PMID: 21396442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Genet Genomics. 2008 Mar;279(3):267-77. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

RpoS regulation of gene expression during exponential growth of Escherichia coli 
K12.

Dong T(1), Kirchhof MG, Schellhorn HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Life Sciences Building, Rm. 433,
1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON, Canada, L8S 4K1. dongt2@mcmaster.ca

RpoS is a major regulator of genes required for adaptation to stationary phase in
E. coli. However, the exponential phase expression of some genes is affected by
rpoS mutation, suggesting RpoS may also have an important physiological role in
growing cells. To test this hypothesis, we examined the regulatory role of RpoS
in exponential phase using both genomic and biochemical approaches. Microarray
expression data revealed that, in the rpoS mutant, the expression of 268 genes
was attenuated while the expression of 24 genes was enhanced. Genes responsible
for carbon source transport (the mal operon for maltose), protein folding (dnaK
and mopAB), and iron acquisition (fepBD, entCBA, fecI, and exbBD) were positively
controlled by RpoS. The importance of RpoS-mediated control of iron acquisition
was confirmed by cellular metal analysis which revealed that the intracellular
iron content of wild type cells was two-fold higher than in rpoS mutant cells.
Surprisingly, many previously identified RpoS stationary-phase dependent genes
were not controlled by RpoS in exponential phase and several genes were
RpoS-regulated only in exponential phase, suggesting the involvement of other
regulators. The expression of RpoS-dependent genes osmY, tnaA and malK was
controlled by Crl, a transcriptional regulator that modulates RpoS activity. In
summary, the identification of a group of exponential phase genes controlled by
RpoS reveals a novel aspect of RpoS function.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-007-0311-4 
PMID: 18158608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Sep;1778(9):1930-45. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Signaling mechanisms for activation of extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma
factors.

Brooks BE(1), Buchanan SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A variety of mechanisms are used to signal extracytoplasmic conditions to the
cytoplasm. These mechanisms activate extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma
factors which recruit RNA-polymerase to specific genes in order to express
appropriate proteins in response to the changing environment. The two best
understood ECF signaling pathways regulate sigma(E)-mediated expression of
periplasmic stress response genes in Escherichia coli and FecI-mediated
expression of iron-citrate transport genes in E. coli. Homologues from other
Gram-negative bacteria suggest that these two signaling mechanisms and variations
on these mechanisms may be the general schemes by which ECF sigma factors are
regulated in Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.06.005 
PMCID: PMC2562455
PMID: 17673165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2007 Mar;189(6):2359-68. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Enhancement of the synthesis of RpoN, Cra, and H-NS by polyamines at the level of
translation in Escherichia coli cultured with glucose and glutamate.

Terui Y(1), Higashi K, Taniguchi S, Shigemasa A, Nishimura K, Yamamoto K,
Kashiwagi K, Ishihama A, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Proteins whose synthesis is enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation
were identified in a polyamine-requiring mutant cultured in the presence of 0.1% 
glucose and 0.02% glutamate instead of 0.4% glucose as an energy source. Under
these conditions, enhancement of cell growth by polyamines was almost the same as
that in the presence of 0.4% glucose. It was found that synthesis of RpoN, Cra,
and H-NS was enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation at the early
logarithmic phase of growth (A(540) of 0.15). The effects of polyamines on
synthesis of RpoN, H-NS, and Cra were due to the existence of unusual
Shine-Dalgarno sequences (RpoN and H-NS) and an inefficient GUG initiation codon 
(Cra) in their mRNAs. Thus, rpoN, cra, and hns genes were identified as new
members of the polyamine modulon. Because most of the polyamine modulon genes
thus far identified encode transcription factors (RpoS [sigma(38)], Cya, FecI
[sigma(18)], Fis, RpoN [sigma(54)], Cra, and H-NS), DNA microarray analysis of
mRNA expressed in cells was performed. At the early logarithmic phase of growth, 
a total of 97 species of mRNAs that were up-regulated by polyamines more than
twofold were under the control of seven polyamine modulon genes mentioned above.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01562-06 
PMCID: PMC1899374
PMID: 17220219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecI) AND (fhuA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecR) AND (fecI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100673. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673. Epub 2021
Apr 16.

The Escherichia coli S2P intramembrane protease RseP regulates ferric citrate
uptake by cleaving the sigma factor regulator FecR.

Yokoyama T(1), Niinae T(2), Tsumagari K(2), Imami K(2), Ishihama Y(2), Hizukuri
Y(3), Akiyama Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yhizukur@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yakiyama@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Escherichia coli RseP, a member of the site-2 protease family of intramembrane
proteases, is involved in the activation of the σE extracytoplasmic stress
response and elimination of signal peptides from the cytoplasmic membrane.
However, whether RseP has additional cellular functions is unclear. In this
study, we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis to search 
for new substrates that might reveal unknown physiological roles for RseP. Our
data showed that the levels of several Fec system proteins encoded by the
fecABCDE operon (fec operon) were significantly decreased in an RseP-deficient
strain. The Fec system is responsible for the uptake of ferric citrate, and the
transcription of the fec operon is controlled by FecI, an alternative sigma
factor, and its regulator FecR, a single-pass transmembrane protein. Assays with 
a fec operon expression reporter demonstrated that the proteolytic activity of
RseP is essential for the ferric citrate-dependent upregulation of the fec
operon. Analysis using the FecR protein and FecR-derived model proteins showed
that FecR undergoes sequential processing at the membrane and that RseP
participates in the last step of this sequential processing to generate the
N-terminal cytoplasmic fragment of FecR that participates in the transcription of
the fec operon with FecI. A shortened FecR construct was not dependent on RseP
for activation, confirming this cleavage step is the essential and sufficient
role of RseP. Our study unveiled that E. coli RseP performs the intramembrane
proteolysis of FecR, a novel physiological role that is essential for regulating 
iron uptake by the ferric citrate transport system.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673 
PMCID: PMC8144685
PMID: 33865858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


2. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00541-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00541-19. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Ferric Citrate Regulator FecR Is Translocated across the Bacterial Inner Membrane
via a Unique Twin-Arginine Transport-Dependent Mechanism.

Passmore IJ(1), Dow JM(1), Coll F(1), Cuccui J(1), Palmer T(2), Wren BW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom brendan.wren@lshtm.ac.uk.

In Escherichia coli, citrate-mediated iron transport is a key nonheme pathway for
the acquisition of iron. Binding of ferric citrate to the outer membrane protein 
FecA induces a signal cascade that ultimately activates the cytoplasmic sigma
factor FecI, resulting in transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport 
genes. Central to this process is signal transduction mediated by the inner
membrane protein FecR. FecR spans the inner membrane through a single
transmembrane helix, which is flanked by cytoplasm- and periplasm-orientated
moieties at the N and C termini. The transmembrane helix of FecR resembles a
twin-arginine signal sequence, and the substitution of the paired arginine
residues of the consensus motif decouples the FecR-FecI signal cascade, rendering
the cells unable to activate transcription of the fec operon when grown on ferric
citrate. Furthermore, the fusion of beta-lactamase C-terminal to the FecR
transmembrane helix results in translocation of the C-terminal domain that is
dependent on the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) system. Our findings
demonstrate that FecR belongs to a select group of bitopic inner membrane
proteins that contain an internal twin-arginine signal sequence.IMPORTANCE Iron
is essential for nearly all living organisms due to its role in metabolic
processes and as a cofactor for many enzymes. The FecRI signal transduction
pathway regulates citrate-mediated iron import in many Gram-negative bacteria,
including Escherichia coli The interactions of FecR with the outer membrane
protein FecA and cytoplasmic anti-sigma factor FecI have been extensively
studied. However, the mechanism by which FecR inserts into the membrane has not
previously been reported. In this study, we demonstrate that the targeting of
FecR to the cytoplasmic membrane is dependent on the Tat system. As such, FecR
represents a new class of bitopic Tat-dependent membrane proteins with an
internal twin-arginine signal sequence.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00541-19 
PMCID: PMC7148137
PMID: 32015149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00058-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00058-20. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Novel Tat-Dependent Protein Secretion.

Braun V(1), Hantke K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Department of Protein
Evolution, Tübingen, Germany volkmar.braun@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(2)IMID Institute, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The transcription initiation signal elicited by the binding of ferric citrate to 
the outer membrane FecA protein is transmitted by the FecR protein across the
cytoplasmic membrane to the FecI extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor. In
this issue of Journal of Bacteriology, I. J. Passmore, J. M. Dow, F. Coll, J.
Cuccui, et al. (J Bacteriol 202:e00541-19, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00541-19) report that the FecR sequence contains both 
the twin-arginine signal motif and the secretory (Sec) avoidance motif typical of
proteins secreted by the twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system. The same study
shows that FecR is indeed secreted by Tat and represents a new class of bitopic
Tat-dependent membrane proteins.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00058-20 
PMCID: PMC7148135
PMID: 32015148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biometals. 2006 Apr;19(2):103-13.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen, 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe2+ bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe2+, the fecI
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-8253-y 
PMID: 16718597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biometals. 2005 Oct;18(5):507-17.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe(2+) bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe(2+), the fecI 
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-3497-0 
PMID: 16333751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Microbiol. 2005 Nov;184(3):175-86. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Occurrence and regulation of the ferric citrate transport system in Escherichia
coli B, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes, and Photorhabdus
luminescens.

Mahren S(1), Schnell H, Braun V.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

In Escherichia coli K-12, transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes
fecABCDE is initiated by binding of diferric dicitrate to the outer membrane
protein FecA which elicits a signaling cascade from the cell surface to the
cytoplasm. The FecI sigma factor is only active in the presence of FecR, which
transfers the signal across the cytoplasmic membrane. In other bacteria, fecIRA
homologues control iron transport gene transcription by siderophores other than
citrate. However, in most cases, the FecI homologues are active in the absence of
the FecR homologues, which might function as anti-sigma factors. Since not all E.
coli strains contain a fec system, we determined the occurrence of fec genes in
selected Enterobacteriaceae and the dependence of FecI activity on FecR.
Incomplete FecIRA systems were chromosomally encoded in Enterobacter aerogenes
strains and plasmid-encoded in K. pneumoniae. E. coli B, Photorhabdus luminescens
and one of three Klebsiella pneumoniae strains had a functional FecIRA regulatory
system as in E. coli K-12. The cytoplasmic N-terminal FecR fragments caused
constitutive FecI activity in the absence of ferric citrate. The PCR-generated
mutant FecI(D40G) was inactive and FecI(S15P) was partially active. FecR of E.
coli K-12 activated FecI of all tested strains except FecI encoded on the
virulence plasmid pLVPK of K. pneumoniae, which differed from E. coli K-12 FecI
by having mutations in region 4, which is important for interaction with FecR.
The C-terminally truncated FecR homologue of pLVPK was inactive. pLVPK-encoded
FecA contains a 38-residue sequence in front of the signal sequence that did not 
prevent processing and proper integration of FecA into the outer membrane of E.
coli and lacks the signaling sequence required for transcription initiation of
the fec transport genes, making it induction-incompetent but transport-competent.
The evidence indicates that fecIRABCDE genes are acquired by horizontal DNA
transfer and can undergo debilitating mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-005-0035-y 
PMID: 16193283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2005 Sep;29(4):673-84. Epub 2004 Oct 29.

Transmembrane transcriptional control (surface signalling) of the Escherichia
coli Fec type.

Braun V(1), Mahren S.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Germany.
volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

The ferric citrate transport system of Escherichia coli is the first example of a
transcription initiation mechanism that starts at the cell surface. The inducer, 
ferric citrate, binds to an outer membrane transport protein, and without further
transport elicits a signal that is transmitted across the outer membrane, the
periplasm, and the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm. Signal transfer
across the three subcellular compartments is mediated by the outer membrane
transport protein that interacts in the periplasm with a cytoplasmic
transmembrane protein. The latter is required for activation of a sigma factor
which belongs to the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor family. A similar
kind of transcription regulation has been demonstrated in Pseudomonas putida, P. 
aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Aerobacter aerogenes,
Bordetella pertussis, B. bronchseptica, B. avium, and Ralstonia solanacearum. The
genomes of P. putida, P. aeruginosa, Nitrosomonas europaea, Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron and Caulobacter crescentus predict the existence of many more
such transcriptional regulatory devices.

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsre.2004.10.001 
PMID: 16102597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jul;185(13):3745-52.

Sites of interaction between the FecA and FecR signal transduction proteins of
ferric citrate transport in Escherichia coli K-12.

Enz S(1), Brand H, Orellana C, Mahren S, Braun V.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

Erratum in
    J Bacteriol. 2003 Nov;185(21):6494.

Transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport genes of Escherichia coli 
K-12 is initiated by a signaling cascade from the cell surface into the
cytoplasm. FecR receives the signal in the periplasm from the outer membrane
protein FecA loaded with ferric citrate, transmits the signal across the
cytoplasmic membrane, and converts FecI in the cytoplasm to an active sigma
factor. In this study, it was shown through the use of a bacterial two-hybrid
system that, in the periplasm, the C-terminal FecR(237-317) fragment interacts
with the N-terminal FecA(1-79) fragment. In the same C-terminal region, amino
acid residues important for the interaction of FecR with FecA were identified by 
random and site-directed mutagenesis. They were preferentially located in and
around a leucine motif (residues 247 to 268) which was found to be highly
conserved in FecR-like proteins. The degree of residual binding of FecR mutant
proteins to FecA was correlated with the degree of transcription initiation in
response to ferric citrate in the culture medium. Three randomly generated
inactive FecR mutants, FecR(L254E), FecR(L269G), and FecR(F284L), were suppressed
to different degrees by the mutants FecA(G39R) and FecR(D43E). One FecR mutant,
FecR (D138E, V197A), induced fecA promoter-directed transcription constitutively 
in the absence of ferric citrate and bound more strongly than wild-type FecR to
FecA. The data showed that FecR interacts in the periplasm with FecA to confer
ferric citrate-induced transcription of the fec transport genes and identified
sites in FecR and FecA that are important for signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.13.3745-3752.2003 
PMCID: PMC161571
PMID: 12813067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2003 Apr;6(2):173-80.

Regulation of the FecI-type ECF sigma factor by transmembrane signalling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Ogierman M.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universtat Tuebingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Induction of the ferric citrate transport genes of Escherichia coli K-12 involves
a signalling cascade that starts at the cell surface and proceeds to the
cytoplasm. Three specific proteins are involved: FecA in the outer membrane, FecR
in the cytoplasmic membrane, and FecI in the cytoplasm. The binding of dinuclear 
ferric citrate to FecA causes substantial structural changes in FecA, triggering 
the signal cascade. The amino-proximal end of FecA interacts with the
carboxy-proximal end of FecR in the periplasm. FecR then transmits the signal
across the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm and activates the FecI sigma
factor, which binds to the RNA polymerase core enzyme and directs the RNA
polymerase to the promoter upstream of the fecABCDE transport genes to initiate
transcription. Transcription of the fecIR regulatory genes and the fec transport 
genes is repressed by the Fur protein loaded with Fe(2+). Therefore,
transcription of the fec transport genes is subjected to double control: cells
first detect iron deficiency and respond by synthesis of the regulatory proteins 
FecI and FecR, which initiate transcription of the fec transport genes, provided 
ferric citrate is available. FecI belongs to the extracytoplasmic function sigma 
factors, which are widespread among bacteria. With the recent sequencing of
complete microbial genomes, it has become apparent that the FecIRA cascade is now
a paradigm for the regulatory control of FecI family sigmas in Gram-negative
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/s1369-5274(03)00022-5 
PMID: 12732308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecR) AND (fecR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100673. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673. Epub 2021
Apr 16.

The Escherichia coli S2P intramembrane protease RseP regulates ferric citrate
uptake by cleaving the sigma factor regulator FecR.

Yokoyama T(1), Niinae T(2), Tsumagari K(2), Imami K(2), Ishihama Y(2), Hizukuri
Y(3), Akiyama Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yhizukur@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yakiyama@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Escherichia coli RseP, a member of the site-2 protease family of intramembrane
proteases, is involved in the activation of the σE extracytoplasmic stress
response and elimination of signal peptides from the cytoplasmic membrane.
However, whether RseP has additional cellular functions is unclear. In this
study, we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis to search 
for new substrates that might reveal unknown physiological roles for RseP. Our
data showed that the levels of several Fec system proteins encoded by the
fecABCDE operon (fec operon) were significantly decreased in an RseP-deficient
strain. The Fec system is responsible for the uptake of ferric citrate, and the
transcription of the fec operon is controlled by FecI, an alternative sigma
factor, and its regulator FecR, a single-pass transmembrane protein. Assays with 
a fec operon expression reporter demonstrated that the proteolytic activity of
RseP is essential for the ferric citrate-dependent upregulation of the fec
operon. Analysis using the FecR protein and FecR-derived model proteins showed
that FecR undergoes sequential processing at the membrane and that RseP
participates in the last step of this sequential processing to generate the
N-terminal cytoplasmic fragment of FecR that participates in the transcription of
the fec operon with FecI. A shortened FecR construct was not dependent on RseP
for activation, confirming this cleavage step is the essential and sufficient
role of RseP. Our study unveiled that E. coli RseP performs the intramembrane
proteolysis of FecR, a novel physiological role that is essential for regulating 
iron uptake by the ferric citrate transport system.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673 
PMCID: PMC8144685
PMID: 33865858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


2. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00541-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00541-19. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Ferric Citrate Regulator FecR Is Translocated across the Bacterial Inner Membrane
via a Unique Twin-Arginine Transport-Dependent Mechanism.

Passmore IJ(1), Dow JM(1), Coll F(1), Cuccui J(1), Palmer T(2), Wren BW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom brendan.wren@lshtm.ac.uk.

In Escherichia coli, citrate-mediated iron transport is a key nonheme pathway for
the acquisition of iron. Binding of ferric citrate to the outer membrane protein 
FecA induces a signal cascade that ultimately activates the cytoplasmic sigma
factor FecI, resulting in transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport 
genes. Central to this process is signal transduction mediated by the inner
membrane protein FecR. FecR spans the inner membrane through a single
transmembrane helix, which is flanked by cytoplasm- and periplasm-orientated
moieties at the N and C termini. The transmembrane helix of FecR resembles a
twin-arginine signal sequence, and the substitution of the paired arginine
residues of the consensus motif decouples the FecR-FecI signal cascade, rendering
the cells unable to activate transcription of the fec operon when grown on ferric
citrate. Furthermore, the fusion of beta-lactamase C-terminal to the FecR
transmembrane helix results in translocation of the C-terminal domain that is
dependent on the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) system. Our findings
demonstrate that FecR belongs to a select group of bitopic inner membrane
proteins that contain an internal twin-arginine signal sequence.IMPORTANCE Iron
is essential for nearly all living organisms due to its role in metabolic
processes and as a cofactor for many enzymes. The FecRI signal transduction
pathway regulates citrate-mediated iron import in many Gram-negative bacteria,
including Escherichia coli The interactions of FecR with the outer membrane
protein FecA and cytoplasmic anti-sigma factor FecI have been extensively
studied. However, the mechanism by which FecR inserts into the membrane has not
previously been reported. In this study, we demonstrate that the targeting of
FecR to the cytoplasmic membrane is dependent on the Tat system. As such, FecR
represents a new class of bitopic Tat-dependent membrane proteins with an
internal twin-arginine signal sequence.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00541-19 
PMCID: PMC7148137
PMID: 32015149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00058-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00058-20. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Novel Tat-Dependent Protein Secretion.

Braun V(1), Hantke K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Department of Protein
Evolution, Tübingen, Germany volkmar.braun@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(2)IMID Institute, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The transcription initiation signal elicited by the binding of ferric citrate to 
the outer membrane FecA protein is transmitted by the FecR protein across the
cytoplasmic membrane to the FecI extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor. In
this issue of Journal of Bacteriology, I. J. Passmore, J. M. Dow, F. Coll, J.
Cuccui, et al. (J Bacteriol 202:e00541-19, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00541-19) report that the FecR sequence contains both 
the twin-arginine signal motif and the secretory (Sec) avoidance motif typical of
proteins secreted by the twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system. The same study
shows that FecR is indeed secreted by Tat and represents a new class of bitopic
Tat-dependent membrane proteins.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00058-20 
PMCID: PMC7148135
PMID: 32015148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMC Vet Res. 2017 Jun 9;13(1):169. doi: 10.1186/s12917-017-1093-5.

Whole genome sequencing of an ExPEC that caused fatal pneumonia at a pig farm in 
Changchun, China.

Kong LC(1), Guo X(1), Wang Z(1), Gao YH(1), Jia BY(1), Liu SM(1), Ma HX(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun, China. hongxia0731001@163.com.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, highly frequent swine respiratory diseases have been
caused by extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (ExPEC) in China. Due to
this increase in ExPECs, this bacterial pathogen has become a threat to the
development of the Chinese swine industry. To investigate ExPEC pathogenesis, we 
isolated a strain (named SLPE) from lesioned porcine lungs from Changchun in
China, reported the draft genome and performed comparative genomic analyses.
RESULTS: Based on the gross post-mortem examination, bacterial isolation, animal 
regression test and 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis, the pathogenic bacteria was 
identified as an ExPEC. The SLPE draft genome was 4.9 Mb with a G + C content of 
51.7%. The phylogenomic comparison indicated that the SLPE strain belongs to the 
B1 monophyletic phylogroups and that its closest relative is Avian Pathogenic
Escherichia coli (APEC) O78. However, the distribution diagram of the pan-genome 
virulence genes demonstrated significant differences between SLPE and APEC078. We
also identified a capsular polysaccharide synthesis gene cluster (CPS) in the
SLPE strain genomes using blastp.
CONCLUSIONS: We isolated the ExPEC (SLPE) from swine lungs in China, performed
the whole genome sequencing and compared the sequence with other Escherichia coli
(E. coli). The comparative genomic analysis revealed several genes including
several virulence factors that are ExPEC strain-specific, such as fimbrial
adhesins (papG II), ireA, pgtP, hlyF, the pix gene cluster and fecR for their
further study. We found a CPS in the SLPE strain genomes for the first time, and 
this CPS is closely related to the CPS from Klebsiella pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-017-1093-5 
PMCID: PMC5466758
PMID: 28599670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 2012 Nov 9;423(5):818-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.09.003. Epub 2012
Sep 11.

Ligand-induced structural changes in the Escherichia coli ferric citrate
transporter reveal modes for regulating protein-protein interactions.

Mokdad A(1), Herrick DZ, Kahn AK, Andrews E, Kim M, Cafiso DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and the Center for Membrane Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4319, USA.

Outer-membrane TonB-dependent transporters, such as the Escherichia coli ferric
citrate transporter FecA, interact with the inner-membrane protein TonB through
an energy-coupling segment termed the Ton box. In FecA, which regulates its own
transcription, the Ton box is preceded by an N-terminal extension that interacts 
with the inner-membrane protein FecR. Here, site-directed spin labeling was used 
to examine the structural basis for transcriptional signaling and Ton box
regulation in FecA. EPR spectroscopy indicates that regions of the N-terminal
domain are in conformational exchange, consistent with its role as a protein
binding element; however, the local fold and dynamics of the domain are not
altered by substrate or TonB. Distance restraints derived from pulse EPR were
used to generate models for the position of the extension in the apo, substrate-,
and TonB-bound states. In the apo state, this domain is positioned at the
periplasmic surface of FecA, where it interacts with the Ton box and blocks
access of the Ton box to the periplasm. Substrate addition rotates the
transcriptional domain and exposes the Ton box, leading to a disorder transition 
in the Ton box that may facilitate interactions with TonB. When a soluble
fragment of TonB is bound to FecA, the transcriptional domain is displaced to one
edge of the barrel, consistent with a proposed β-strand exchange mechanism.
However, neither substrate nor TonB displaces the N-terminus further into the
periplasm. This result suggests that the intact TonB system mediates both
signaling and transport by unfolding portions of the transporter.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.09.003 
PMCID: PMC3472153
PMID: 22982293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2006 Sep;188(17):6440-2.

Residues involved in FecR binding are localized on one side of the FecA signaling
domain in Escherichia coli.

Breidenstein E(1), Mahren S, Braun V.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

Ferric citrate transport in Escherichia coli involves proteins encoded by the fec
genes, including the transport and signaling protein FecA and the signal
transducing protein FecR. Randomly isolated FecA point mutants showed a reduced
interaction with FecR and a reduced transcription initiation of the ferric
citrate transport genes. The mutations were localized on one side of the FecA
signaling domain, which might form the interface to FecR. Some of the mutants
showed strongly reduced iron transport rates, which suggests that the signaling
domain affects the structure of the FecA transporter domain.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00741-06 
PMCID: PMC1595354
PMID: 16923915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biometals. 2006 Apr;19(2):103-13.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen, 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe2+ bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe2+, the fecI
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-8253-y 
PMID: 16718597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2006 Mar;188(6):2027-37.

Gene expression regulation by the Curli activator CsgD protein: modulation of
cellulose biosynthesis and control of negative determinants for microbial
adhesion.

Brombacher E(1), Baratto A, Dorel C, Landini P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Federal Institute of Environmental Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland.

Curli fibers, encoded by the csgBAC genes, promote biofilm formation in
Escherichia coli and other enterobacteria. Curli production is dependent on the
CsgD transcription activator, which also promotes cellulose biosynthesis. In this
study, we investigated the effects of CsgD expression from a weak constitutive
promoter in the biofilm formation-deficient PHL565 strain of E. coli. We found
that despite its function as a transcription activator, the CsgD protein is
localized in the cytoplasmic membrane. Constitutive CsgD expression promotes
biofilm formation by PHL565 and activates transcription from the csgBAC promoter;
however, csgBAC expression remains dependent on temperature and the growth
medium. Constitutive expression of the CsgD protein results in altered
transcription patterns for at least 24 novel genes, in addition to the previously
identified CsgD-dependent genes. The cspA and fecR genes, encoding regulatory
proteins responding to cold shock and to iron, respectively, and yoaD, encoding a
putative negative regulator of cellulose biosynthesis, were found to be some of
the novel CsgD-regulated genes. Consistent with the predicted functional role,
increased expression of the yoaD gene negatively affects cell aggregation, while 
yoaD inactivation results in stimulation of cell aggregation and leads to
increased cellulose production. Inactivation of fecR results in significant
increases in both cell aggregation and biofilm formation, while the effects of
cspA are not as strong in the conditions tested. Our results indicate that CsgD
can modulate cellulose biosynthesis through activation of the yoaD gene. In
addition, the positive effect of CsgD on biofilm formation might be enhanced by
repression of the fecR gene.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.188.6.2027-2037.2006 
PMCID: PMC1428138
PMID: 16513732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biometals. 2005 Oct;18(5):507-17.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe(2+) bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe(2+), the fecI 
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-3497-0 
PMID: 16333751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fimZ) AND (fimZ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Environ Microbiol. 2007 Feb;9(2):332-46.

Temporal gene-expression in Escherichia coli K-12 biofilms.

Domka J(1), Lee J, Bansal T, Wood TK.

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, USA.

Analysis of the temporal development of Escherichia coli K-12 biofilms in complex
medium indicates the greatest differential gene expression between biofilm and
suspension cells occurred in young biofilms at 4 and 7 h (versus 15 and 24 h).
The main classes of genes differentially expressed (biofilm versus biofilm and
biofilm versus suspension cells) include 42 related to stress response (e.g.
cspABFGI), 66 related to quorum sensing (e.g. ydgG, gadABC, hdeABD), 20 related
to motility (e.g. flgBCEFH, fliLMQR, motB), 13 related to fimbriae (e.g. sfmCHM, 
fimZ, csgC), 24 related to sulfur and tryptophan metabolism (e.g. trpLBA, tnaLA, 
cysDNCJH), 80 related to transport (e.g. gatABC, agaBC, ycjJ, ydfJ, phoU,
phnCJKM), and six related to extracellular matrix (e.g. wcaBDEC). Of the 93
mutants identified and studied, 76 showed altered biofilm formation. Biofilm
architecture changed from thin and dense to globular and dispersed to dense and
smooth. The quorum-sensing signal AI-2 controls gene expression most clearly in
mature biofilms (24 h) when intracellular AI-2 levels are highest. Sulfate
transport and metabolism genes (cysAUWDN) and genes with unknown functions
(ymgABCZ) were repressed in young (4, 7 h) biofilms, induced in developed
biofilms (15 h), and repressed in mature (24 h) biofilms. Genes related to both
motility and fimbriae were induced in biofilms at all sampling time points and
colanic acid genes were induced in mature biofilms (24 h). Genes related to
dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthesis from galactitol and galactosamine (e.g.
gatZABCDR, agaBCY) were highly regulated in biofilms. Genes involved in the
biosynthesis of indole and sulfide (tnaLA) are repressed in biofilms after 7 h
(corroborated by decreasing intracellular indole concentrations in biofilms).
Cold-shock protein transcriptional regulators (cspABFGI) appear to be positive
biofilm regulators, and deletions in respiratory genes (e.g. hyaACD, hyfCG, appC,
narG) increased biofilm formation sevenfold.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01143.x 
PMID: 17222132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2003 Mar;185(6):1851-6.

Comprehensive studies of drug resistance mediated by overexpression of response
regulators of two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Japan.

In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames (ORFs) that are assumed to 
be response regulator genes of two-component signal transduction systems on the
basis of sequence similarities. We cloned all of these 32 ORFs into a multicopy
expression vector and investigated whether or not they confer drug resistance via
control of drug resistance determinants. Fifteen of these ORFs, i.e., baeR, citB,
cpxR, evgA, fimZ, kdpE, narL, narP, ompR, rcsB, rstA, torR, yedW, yehT, and dcuR,
conferred increased single- or multidrug resistance. Two-thirds of them conferred
deoxycholate resistance. Five of them, i.e., evgA, baeR, ompR, cpxR, and rcsB,
modulated the expression of several drug exporter genes. The drug resistance
mediated by evgA, baeR, and cpxR could be assigned to drug exporters by using
drug exporter gene knockout strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.6.1851-1856.2003 
PMCID: PMC150137
PMID: 12618449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2002 Feb;184(4):1209-13.

FimZ is a molecular link between sticking and swimming in Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium.

Clegg S(1), Hughes KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA. stevenclegg@uiowa.edu

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium produces two types of filamentous
appendages on its surface. Fimbriae mediate adherence to tissues and cells via
receptor-specific interactions, and flagella are the organelles of motility.
These appendages play a role in colonization and dissemination, respectively,
from infected surfaces and may be important components of bacterial survival.
Increased expression of FimZ in serovar Typhimurium resulted in bacteria which
were hyperfimbriated but were nonmotile in soft agar. This lack of motility was
associated with down regulation of the flhDC master flagellar operon. Therefore, 
FimZ represents a molecular connection between flagella and fimbrial formation in
serovar Typhimurium, indicating that the synthesis of flagella and fimbriae are
oppositely controlled.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.184.4.1209-1213.2002 
PMCID: PMC134799
PMID: 11807085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2001 May;40(3):757-68.

Control of FimY translation and type 1 fimbrial production by the arginine tRNA
encoded by fimU in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Tinker JK(1), Clegg S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

Expression of type 1 fimbriae in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
undergoes phase variation or alteration between a fimbriate and a non-fimbriate
phenotype. This variation is known to be dependent upon environmental conditions 
in vitro and is thought to be a complex process involving regulation by a number 
of proteins. The regulatory genes located within the fim cluster include fimZ,
fimY and fimW. A fourth gene of the cluster, fimU, encodes a tRNA molecule
specific for rare arginine codons. We have shown previously that fimU affects the
expression of S. typhimurium type 1 fimbriae, and that fimU is functionally
related to the Escherichia coli gene argU. A high frequency of rare arginine
codons was found within the three fim regulatory genes, and five of these codons 
were clustered within fimY alone. To investigate the affects of fimU on FimY
production, a FimY fusion with the E. coli maltose-binding protein was
constructed and expressed in an E. coli argU background. Western blots of
extracts from the argU mutant and parental strain indicated that production of
FimY was significantly reduced in the absence of a functional tRNAArg(UCU). FimY 
production in this mutant could be restored to high levels when fimU was
introduced on a plasmid, and also when three rare arginine codons, located within
the first 14 positions within fimY, were exchanged for major arginine codons. A
Tn10 insertion from a Salmonella enteritidis fimU mutant was transduced into S.
typhimurium, and this strain was analysed for the expression of type 1 fimbriae. 
The resulting S. typhimurium fimU mutant was found to be non-fimbriate under all 
conditions tested and could be complemented by the introduction of fimU alone on 
a plasmid. In addition, this mutant could be complemented by transformation with 
fimY altered in the first three rare arginine codons. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction confirmed that the fimY transcript was
present at similar levels in the fimU mutant and parental strain. These results
indicated that the observed inhibition of protein expression was not occurring at
the transcriptional level. Analysis of expression of the malEfimY fusion in the
S. typhimurium fimU mutant and parental strain confirmed the data observed in E. 
coli. In contrast, a FimW fusion was found to be produced at similar levels in
both the fimU mutant and the parental strain. Together, these data indicate that 
the absence of a functional fimU results in the inhibition of efficient FimY
translation, and thus type 1 fimbrial production in S. typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02430.x 
PMID: 11359580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2001 Jan;183(2):435-42.

FimW is a negative regulator affecting type 1 fimbrial expression in Salmonella
enterica serovar typhimurium.

Tinker JK(1), Hancox LS, Clegg S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Type 1 fimbriae are proteinaceous surface appendages that carry adhesins specific
for mannosylated glycoproteins. These fimbriae are found on most members of the
family Enterobacteriaceae and are known to facilitate binding to a variety of
eukaryotic cells, including those found on the mucosal surfaces of the alimentary
tract. We have shown that the regulation of type 1 fimbrial expression in
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is controlled, in part, by the products
of four genes found within the fim gene cluster: fimZ, fimY, fimW, and fimU. To
better understand the specific role of FimW in fimbrial expression, a mutation
was constructed in this gene by the insertion of a kanamycin resistance DNA
cassette into the chromosome. The resulting fimW mutation was characterized by
mannose-sensitive hemagglutination and agglutination with fimbria-specific
antiserum. Assays suggested that this mutant was more strongly fimbriate than the
parental strain, exhibiting a four- to eightfold increase in fimbrial production.
The fimW mutation was introduced into a second strain of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium, and this mutant was also found to be strongly fimbriate
compared to the parental strain. Consistent with the role of this protein as a
negative regulator, fimA-lacZ expression in serovar Typhimurium, as well as in
Escherichia coli, was increased twofold in the absence of functional FimW. Primer
extension analysis determined that fimW transcription is initiated from its own
promoter 31 bp upstream of the translation start site. Analysis using a fimW-lacZ
reporter indicated that fimW expression in serovar Typhimurium was increased
under conditions that select for poorly fimbriate bacteria and low fimA
expression. FimW also appears to act as an autoregulator, since expression from
the fimW-lacZ reporter was increased in a fimW mutant. FimW was partially
purified by fusion with the E. coli maltose-binding protein. Use of this FimW
protein extract, as well as others, in DNA-binding assays was unable to identify 
a specific binding site for FimW in the fimA, fimZ, fimY, or fimW promoter
regions. To analyze protein-protein interactions, FimW was expressed in a
LexA-based two-hybrid system in E. coli. A significant interaction between FimW
and the DNA-binding activator protein, FimZ, was detected using this system.
These results indicate that FimW is a negative regulator of serovar Typhimurium
type 1 fimbrial expression and may function by interfering with FimZ-mediated
activation of fimA expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.2.435-442.2001 
PMCID: PMC94897
PMID: 11133935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Infect Immun. 2000 Jun;68(6):3305-13.

Characterization of FimY as a coactivator of type 1 fimbrial expression in
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Tinker JK(1), Clegg S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Type 1 fimbriae of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium are surface appendages
that carry adhesins specific for mannosylated host glycoconjugates. Regulation of
the major fimbrial subunit is thought to be controlled by a number of ancillary
fim genes, including fimZ, fimY, fimW, and fimU. Previous studies using a FimZ
mutant have indicated that this protein is necessary for fimA expression, and in 
vitro DNA binding assays determined that FimZ is a transcriptional activator that
binds directly to the fimA promoter. To determine the role of FimY as a potential
regulator of fimbrial expression, a fimY mutant of serovar Typhimurium was
generated by allelic exchange. This mutant was found to be phenotypically
nonfimbriate. No transcription from the fimA promoter was detected in a fimY
mutant containing a fimA-lacZ reporter construct located on the chromosome. In
addition, transcription from the cloned fimY promoter was not detected in
Escherichia coli unless both FimZ and FimY were present, indicating that these
proteins also act as coactivators of fimY expression. Consistent with these
results, there is no transcription from a fimY-lacZ reporter construct within a
serovar Typhimurium fimY or fimZ mutant. Studies using the fimY-lacZ construct
reveal that expression of this gene varies with environmental conditions in a
manner similar to fimA expression. Extensive in vitro DNA binding assays using
extracts from E. coli that overexpress FimY, as well as partially purified FimY, 
were unable to identify a specific interaction between FimY and the fimA or fimY 
promoter. The results indicate that FimY is a positive regulator of fimbrial
expression and that this protein acts in cooperation with FimZ to regulate the
expression of Salmonella type 1 fimbrial appendages.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.68.6.3305-3313.2000 
PMCID: PMC97587
PMID: 10816478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 1999 Feb;181(4):1301-8.

Analysis of the type 1 pilin gene cluster fim in Salmonella: its distinct
evolutionary histories in the 5' and 3' regions.

Boyd EF(1), Hartl DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The type 1 pilin encoded by fim is present in both Escherichia coli and
Salmonella natural isolates, but several lines of evidence indicate that
similarities at the fim locus may be an example of independent acquisition rather
than common ancestry. For example, the fim gene cluster is found at different
chromosomal locations and with distinct gene orders in these closely related
species. In this work we examined the fim gene cluster of Salmonella, the genes
of which show high nucleotide sequence divergence from their E. coli
counterparts, as well as a different G+C content and codon usage. DNA
hybridization analysis revealed that, among the salmonellae, the fim gene cluster
is present in all isolates of S. enterica but is absent from S. bongori.
Molecular phylogenetic analyses of the fimA and fimI genes yield an estimate of
phylogeny that is in satisfactory congruence with housekeeping and other
virulence genes examined in this species. In contrast, phylogenetic analyses of
the fimZ, fimY, and fimW genes indicate that horizontal transfer of this region
has occurred more than once. There is also size variation in the fimZ, fimY, and 
fimW intergenic regions in the 3' region, and these genes are absent in isolate
S2983 of subspecies IIIa. Interestingly, the G+C contents of the fimZ, fimY, and 
fimW genes are less than 46%, which is considerably lower than those of the other
six genes of the fim cluster. This study demonstrates that horizontal
transmission of all or part of the same gene cluster can occur repeatedly, with
the result that different regions of a single gene cluster may have different
evolutionary histories.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.4.1301-1308.1999 
PMCID: PMC93509
PMID: 9973358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (araC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030654. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Regulatory design governing progression of population growth phases in bacteria.

Martínez-Antonio A(1), Lomnitz JG, Sandoval S, Aldana M, Savageau MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ingeniería Genética, Cinvestav, Irapuato, Guanajuato, México. 
amartinez@ira.cinvestav.mx

It has long been noted that batch cultures inoculated with resting bacteria
exhibit a progression of growth phases traditionally labeled lag, exponential,
pre-stationary and stationary. However, a detailed molecular description of the
mechanisms controlling the transitions between these phases is lacking. A core
circuit, formed by a subset of regulatory interactions involving five global
transcription factors (FIS, HNS, IHF, RpoS and GadX), has been identified by
correlating information from the well- established transcriptional regulatory
network of Escherichia coli and genome-wide expression data from cultures in
these different growth phases. We propose a functional role for this circuit in
controlling progression through these phases. Two alternative hypotheses for
controlling the transition between the growth phases are first, a continuous
graded adjustment to changing environmental conditions, and second, a
discontinuous hysteretic switch at critical thresholds between growth phases. We 
formulate a simple mathematical model of the core circuit, consisting of
differential equations based on the power-law formalism, and show by mathematical
and computer-assisted analysis that there are critical conditions among the
parameters of the model that can lead to hysteretic switch behavior, which--if
validated experimentally--would suggest that the transitions between different
growth phases might be analogous to cellular differentiation. Based on these
provocative results, we propose experiments to test the alternative hypotheses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030654 
PMCID: PMC3283595
PMID: 22363461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2010 Apr;58(3):344-55. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00645.x. Epub 2010 Jan 28.

Autoactivation of the AggR regulator of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli in
vitro and in vivo.

Morin N(1), Tirling C, Ivison SM, Kaur AP, Nataro JP, Steiner TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Vaccine
Development, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) causes diarrhea in diverse populations 
worldwide. The AraC-like regulator AggR is a key virulence regulator in EAEC.
AggR-regulated genes include those encoding the Aggregative Adherence Fimbria,
the dispersin protein, and a type VI secretion system. This study characterizes
the regulation of the aggR promoter (P(aggR)). Using primer extension analysis,
the transcriptional start site of the aggR promoter was located 40 nucleotides
upstream of the translational start. P(aggR) was found to be autoregulated and
DNA footprinting revealed the presence of two AggR-binding sites: one upstream of
the transcriptional start site and one downstream. Additionally, P(aggR) was
found to be positively regulated by the DNA-binding protein FIS and negatively
regulated by the global regulator H-NS. To further understand this complex
regulation scheme, a bacterial luciferase reporter system was used with a mouse
model of EAEC colonization. This allowed for the in vivo measurement of P(aggR), 
P(fis), and P(hns) activity. EAEC present in the mouse intestine possessed
relatively high levels of P(fis) and P(aggR) activity and a low level of P(hns)
when compared with in vitro experiments. The data provide significant insights
into the regulation cascade leading to aggR expression in the mammalian intestine
during EAEC infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00645.x 
PMID: 20132305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (cra)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol. 2016;155:1-54. doi: 10.1007/10_2015_320.

Metabolic Regulation and Coordination of the Metabolism in Bacteria in Response
to a Variety of Growth Conditions.

Shimizu K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820-8502, Japan.
shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.
(2)Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata,
997-0017, Japan. shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.

Living organisms have sophisticated but well-organized regulation system. It is
important to understand the metabolic regulation mechanisms in relation to growth
environment for the efficient design of cell factories for biofuels and
biochemicals production. Here, an overview is given for carbon catabolite
regulation, nitrogen regulation, ion, sulfur, and phosphate regulations,
stringent response under nutrient starvation as well as oxidative stress
regulation, redox state regulation, acid-shock, heat- and cold-shock regulations,
solvent stress regulation, osmoregulation, and biofilm formation, and quorum
sensing focusing on Escherichia coli metabolism and others. The coordinated
regulation mechanisms are of particular interest in getting insight into the
principle which governs the cell metabolism. The metabolism is controlled by both
enzyme-level regulation and transcriptional regulation via transcription factors 
such as cAMP-Crp, Cra, Csr, Fis, P(II)(GlnB), NtrBC, CysB, PhoR/B, SoxR/S, Fur,
MarR, ArcA/B, Fnr, NarX/L, RpoS, and (p)ppGpp for stringent response, where the
timescales for enzyme-level and gene-level regulations are different. Moreover,
multiple regulations are coordinated by the intracellular metabolites, where
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), and acetyl-CoA
(AcCoA) play important roles for enzyme-level regulation as well as
transcriptional control, while α-ketoacids such as α-ketoglutaric acid (αKG),
pyruvate (PYR), and oxaloacetate (OAA) play important roles for the coordinated
regulation between carbon source uptake rate and other nutrient uptake rate such 
as nitrogen or sulfur uptake rate by modulation of cAMP via Cya.

DOI: 10.1007/10_2015_320 
PMID: 25712586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Metabolites. 2013 Dec 30;4(1):1-35. doi: 10.3390/metabo4010001.

Regulation Systems of Bacteria such as Escherichia coli in Response to Nutrient
Limitation and Environmental Stresses.

Shimizu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka, Iizuka 820-8502, Japan.
shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.

An overview was made to understand the regulation system of a bacterial cell such
as Escherichia coli in response to nutrient limitation such as carbon, nitrogen, 
phosphate, sulfur, ion sources, and environmental stresses such as oxidative
stress, acid shock, heat shock, and solvent stresses. It is quite important to
understand how the cell detects environmental signals, integrate such
information, and how the cell system is regulated. As for catabolite regulation, 
F1,6B P (FDP), PEP, and PYR play important roles in enzyme level regulation
together with transcriptional regulation by such transcription factors as Cra,
Fis, CsrA, and cAMP-Crp. αKG plays an important role in the coordinated control
between carbon (C)- and nitrogen (N)-limitations, where αKG inhibits enzyme I
(EI) of phosphotransferase system (PTS), thus regulating the glucose uptake rate 
in accordance with N level. As such, multiple regulation systems are co-ordinated
for the cell synthesis and energy generation against nutrient limitations and
environmental stresses. As for oxidative stress, the TCA cycle both generates and
scavenges the reactive oxygen species (ROSs), where NADPH produced at ICDH and
the oxidative pentose phosphate pathways play an important role in coping with
oxidative stress. Solvent resistant mechanism was also considered for the
stresses caused by biofuels and biochemicals production in the cell.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo4010001 
PMCID: PMC4018673
PMID: 24958385 


3. J Bacteriol. 2007 Mar;189(6):2359-68. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Enhancement of the synthesis of RpoN, Cra, and H-NS by polyamines at the level of
translation in Escherichia coli cultured with glucose and glutamate.

Terui Y(1), Higashi K, Taniguchi S, Shigemasa A, Nishimura K, Yamamoto K,
Kashiwagi K, Ishihama A, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Proteins whose synthesis is enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation
were identified in a polyamine-requiring mutant cultured in the presence of 0.1% 
glucose and 0.02% glutamate instead of 0.4% glucose as an energy source. Under
these conditions, enhancement of cell growth by polyamines was almost the same as
that in the presence of 0.4% glucose. It was found that synthesis of RpoN, Cra,
and H-NS was enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation at the early
logarithmic phase of growth (A(540) of 0.15). The effects of polyamines on
synthesis of RpoN, H-NS, and Cra were due to the existence of unusual
Shine-Dalgarno sequences (RpoN and H-NS) and an inefficient GUG initiation codon 
(Cra) in their mRNAs. Thus, rpoN, cra, and hns genes were identified as new
members of the polyamine modulon. Because most of the polyamine modulon genes
thus far identified encode transcription factors (RpoS [sigma(38)], Cya, FecI
[sigma(18)], Fis, RpoN [sigma(54)], Cra, and H-NS), DNA microarray analysis of
mRNA expressed in cells was performed. At the early logarithmic phase of growth, 
a total of 97 species of mRNAs that were up-regulated by polyamines more than
twofold were under the control of seven polyamine modulon genes mentioned above.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01562-06 
PMCID: PMC1899374
PMID: 17220219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1999 Dec;181(23):7390-3.

Regulation of adhE (encoding ethanol oxidoreductase) by the Fis protein in
Escherichia coli.

Membrillo-Hernández J(1), Kwon O, De Wulf P, Finkel SE, Lin EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The adhE gene of Escherichia coli encodes a multifunctional ethanol
oxidoreductase whose expression is 10-fold higher under anaerobic than aerobic
conditions. Transcription of the gene is under the negative control of the Cra
(catabolite repressor-activator) protein, whereas translation of the adhE mRNA
requires processing by RNase III. In this report, we show that the expression of 
adhE also depends on the Fis (factor for inversion stimulation) protein. A strain
bearing a fis::kan null allele failed to grow anaerobically on glucose solely
because of inadequate adhE transcription. However, fis expression itself is not
under redox control. Sequence inspection of the adhE promoter revealed three
potential Fis binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis, using
purified Fis protein and adhE promoter DNA, showed three different complexes.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.23.7390-7393.1999 
PMCID: PMC103705
PMID: 10572146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dksA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS One. 2011 May 6;6(5):e19235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235.

The E. coli anti-sigma factor Rsd: studies on the specificity and regulation of
its expression.

Hofmann N(1), Wurm R, Wagner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Among the seven different sigma factors in E. coli σ(70) has the
highest concentration and affinity for the core RNA polymerase. The E. coli
protein Rsd is regarded as an anti-sigma factor, inhibiting σ(70)-dependent
transcription at the onset of stationary growth. Although binding of Rsd to σ(70)
has been shown and numerous structural studies on Rsd have been performed the
detailed mechanism of action is still unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have performed studies to unravel the function
and regulation of Rsd expression in vitro and in vivo. Cross-linking and affinity
binding revealed that Rsd is able to interact with σ(70), with the core enzyme of
RNA polymerase and is able to form dimers in solution. Unexpectedly, we find that
Rsd does also interact with σ(38), the stationary phase-specific sigma factor.
This interaction was further corroborated by gel retardation and footprinting
studies with different promoter fragments and σ(38)- or σ(70)-containing RNA
polymerase in presence of Rsd. Under competitive in vitro transcription
conditions, in presence of both sigma factors, a selective inhibition of
σ(70)-dependent transcription was prevailing, however. Analysis of rsd expression
revealed that the nucleoid-associated proteins H-NS and FIS, StpA and LRP bind to
the regulatory region of the rsd promoters. Furthermore, the major promoter P2
was shown to be down-regulated in vivo by RpoS, the stationary phase-specific
sigma factor and the transcription factor DksA, while induction of the stringent 
control enhanced rsd promoter activity. Most notably, the dam-dependent
methylation of a cluster of GATC sites turned out to be important for efficient
rsd transcription.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results contribute to a better understanding of the
intricate mechanism of Rsd-mediated sigma factor specificity changes during
stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235 
PMCID: PMC3089606
PMID: 21573101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2006 Aug;188(16):5775-82.

DksA is required for growth phase-dependent regulation, growth rate-dependent
control, and stringent control of fis expression in Escherichia coli.

Mallik P(1), Paul BJ, Rutherford ST, Gourse RL, Osuna R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Albany, 1400 Washington
Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA.

DksA is a critical transcription factor in Escherichia coli that binds to RNA
polymerase and potentiates control of rRNA promoters and certain amino acid
promoters. Given the kinetic similarities between rRNA promoters and the fis
promoter (Pfis), we investigated the possibility that DksA might also control
transcription from Pfis. We show that the absence of dksA extends transcription
from Pfis well into the late logarithmic and stationary growth phases,
demonstrating the importance of DksA for growth phase-dependent regulation of
fis. We also show that transcription from Pfis increases with steady-state growth
rate and that dksA is absolutely required for this regulation. In addition, both 
DksA and ppGpp are required for inhibition of Pfis promoter activity following
amino acid starvation, and these factors act directly and synergistically to
negatively control Pfis transcription in vitro. DksA decreases the half-life of
the intrinsically short-lived fis promoter-RNA polymerase complex and increases
its sensitivity to the concentration of CTP, the predominant initiating
nucleotide triphosphate for this promoter. This work extends our understanding of
the multiple factors controlling fis expression and demonstrates the generality
of the DksA requirement for regulation of kinetically similar promoters.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00276-06 
PMCID: PMC1540068
PMID: 16885445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Sep;57(6):1636-52.

A genetic selection for supercoiling mutants of Escherichia coli reveals proteins
implicated in chromosome structure.

Hardy CD(1), Cozzarelli NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 16 Barker Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3204, USA.

Chromosomes are divided into topologically independent regions, called domains,
by the action of uncharacterized barriers. With the goal of identifying domain
barrier components, we designed a genetic selection for mutants with reduced
negative supercoiling of the Escherichia coli chromosome. We employed a strain
that contained two chromosomally located reporter genes under the control of a
supercoiling-sensitive promoter and used transposon mutagenesis to generate a
wide range of mutants. We subjected the selected mutants to a series of secondary
screens and identified five proteins as modulators of chromosomal supercoiling in
vivo. Three of these proteins: H-NS, Fis and DksA, have clear ties to chromosome 
biology. The other two proteins, phosphoglucomutase (Pgm) and transketolase
(TktA), are enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism and have not previously
been shown to affect DNA. Deletion of any of the identified genes specifically
affected chromosome topology, without affecting plasmid supercoiling. We suggest 
that at least H-NS, Fis and perhaps TktA assist directly in the supercoiling of
domains by forming topological barriers on the E. coli chromosome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04799.x 
PMID: 16135230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2005 May;56(4):1087-102.

DksA represses ribosomal gene transcription in Pseudomonas aeruginosa by
interacting with RNA polymerase on ribosomal promoters.

Perron K(1), Comte R, van Delden C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Médecine Moléculaire, Centre Médical
Universitaire, Université de Genève, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

In Escherichia coli transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is regulated by the
H-NS and Fis proteins, as well as by the small signal molecule ppGpp and the
initiating nucleotides. During amino acid starvation, the concentration of ppGpp 
increases, and binding of this alarmone to RNA polymerase (RNAP) leads to
inhibition of rRNA transcription, a regulatory event called stringent response.
Here we show that in Pseudomonas aeruginosa DksA, a protein with pleiotropic
effects, is a negative regulator of rRNA transcription both during exponential
growth and stringent conditions. A dksA mutant overexpresses rRNA, without being 
affected in the production of ppGpp. Cell-fractionation and chromosome
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that DksA is associated with DNA, in 
particular with promoters of ribosomal genes in vivo. The binding to rRNA
promoters specifically increases during stringent response, and correlates with
the binding of RNAP to these regions. Moreover DksA can be copurified with RNAP
subunits in vivo. DNA band shift experiments show that DksA, in synergy with
ppGpp, increases the binding of RNAP to ribosomal promoters. Therefore DksA might
be a new regulator of rRNA transcription in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04597.x 
PMID: 15853892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dnaJ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dnaK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Sep;65(9):4181-8.

Bacterial growth state distinguished by single-cell protein profiling: does
chlorination kill coliforms in municipal effluent?

Rockabrand D(1), Austin T, Kaiser R, Blum P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588-0666, USA.

Municipal effluent is the largest reservoir of human enteric bacteria. Its public
health significance, however, depends upon the physiological status of the
wastewater bacterial community. A novel immunofluorescence assay was developed
and used to examine the bacterial growth state during wastewater disinfection.
Quantitative levels of three highly conserved cytosolic proteins (DnaK, Dps, and 
Fis) were determined by using enterobacterium-specific antibody
fluorochrome-coupled probes. Enterobacterial Fis homologs were abundant in
growing cells and nearly undetectable in stationary-phase cells. In contrast,
enterobacterial Dps homologs were abundant in stationary-phase cells but
virtually undetectable in growing cells. The range of variation in the abundance 
of both proteins was at least 100-fold as determined by Western blotting and
immunofluorescence analysis. Enterobacterial DnaK homologs were nearly invariant 
with growth state, enabling their use as permeabilization controls. The cellular 
growth states of individual enterobacteria in wastewater samples were determined 
by measurement of Fis, Dps, and DnaK abundance (protein profiling). Intermediate 
levels of Fis and Dps were evident and occurred in response to physiological
transitions. The results indicate that chlorination failed to kill coliforms but 
rather elicited nutrient starvation and a reversible nonculturable state. These
studies suggest that the current standard procedures for wastewater analysis
which rely on detection of culturable cells likely underestimate fecal coliform
content.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.65.9.4181-4188.1999 
PMCID: PMC99757
PMID: 10473432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (ftsZ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2021 Mar 8;203(7). pii: e00659-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00659-20. Print
2021 Mar 8.

TusA Is a Versatile Protein That Links Translation Efficiency to Cell Division in
Escherichia coli.

Yildiz T(1), Leimkühler S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany sleim@uni-potsdam.de.

To enable accurate and efficient translation, sulfur modifications are introduced
posttranscriptionally into nucleosides in tRNAs. The biosynthesis of tRNA sulfur 
modifications involves unique sulfur trafficking systems for the incorporation of
sulfur atoms in different nucleosides of tRNA. One of the proteins that is
involved in inserting the sulfur for 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine
(mnm5s2U34) modifications in tRNAs is the TusA protein. TusA, however, is a
versatile protein that is also involved in numerous other cellular pathways.
Despite its role as a sulfur transfer protein for the 2-thiouridine formation in 
tRNA, a fundamental role of TusA in the general physiology of Escherichia coli
has also been discovered. Poor viability, a defect in cell division, and a
filamentous cell morphology have been described previously for tusA-deficient
cells. In this report, we aimed to dissect the role of TusA for cell viability.
We were able to show that the lack of the thiolation status of wobble uridine
(U34) nucleotides present on Lys, Gln, or Glu in tRNAs has a major consequence on
the translation efficiency of proteins; among the affected targets are the
proteins RpoS and Fis. Both proteins are major regulatory factors, and the
deregulation of their abundance consequently has a major effect on the cellular
regulatory network, with one consequence being a defect in cell division by
regulating the FtsZ ring formation.IMPORTANCE More than 100 different
modifications are found in RNAs. One of these modifications is the mnm5s2U
modification at the wobble position 34 of tRNAs for Lys, Gln, and Glu. The
functional significance of U34 modifications is substantial since it restricts
the conformational flexibility of the anticodon, thus providing translational
fidelity. We show that in an Escherichia coli TusA mutant strain, involved in
sulfur transfer for the mnm5s2U34 thio modifications, the translation efficiency 
of RpoS and Fis, two major cellular regulatory proteins, is altered. Therefore,
in addition to the transcriptional regulation and the factors that influence
protein stability, tRNA modifications that ensure the translational efficiency
provide an additional crucial regulatory factor for protein synthesis.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00659-20 
PMCID: PMC8088512
PMID: 33526615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (lpxC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2014 Oct 23;426(21):3553-68. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.009. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

DNA recognition by a σ(54) transcriptional activator from Aquifex aeolicus.

Vidangos NK(1), Heideker J(1), Lyubimov A(1), Lamers M(1), Huo Y(2), Pelton
JG(3), Ton J(1), Gralla J(2), Berger J(1), Wemmer DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, MC-1460, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, Box 951569, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California, MC-1460, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA; Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address: dewemmer@berkeley.edu.

Transcription initiation by bacterial σ(54)-polymerase requires the action of a
transcriptional activator protein. Activators bind sequence-specifically upstream
of the transcription initiation site via a DNA-binding domain (DBD). The
structurally characterized DBDs from activators all belong to the Fis (factor for
inversion stimulation) family of helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins. We report
here structures of the free and DNA-bound forms of the DBD of NtrC4 (4DBD) from
Aquifex aeolicus, a member of the NtrC family of σ(54) activators. Two
NtrC4-binding sites were identified upstream (-145 and -85bp) from the start of
the lpxC gene, which is responsible for the first committed step in lipid A
biosynthesis. This is the first experimental evidence for σ(54) regulation in
lpxC expression. 4DBD was crystallized both without DNA and in complex with the
-145-binding site. The structures, together with biochemical data, indicate that 
NtrC4 binds to DNA in a manner that is similar to that of its close homolog, Fis.
The greater sequence specificity for the binding of 4DBD relative to Fis seems to
arise from a larger number of base-specific contacts contributing to affinity
than for Fis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.009 
PMCID: PMC4188747
PMID: 25158097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (pdhR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Aug 18;4:116. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116.

Integrative inference of gene-regulatory networks in Escherichia coli using
information theoretic concepts and sequence analysis.

Kaleta C(1), Göhler A, Schuster S, Jahreis K, Guthke R, Nikolajewa S.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology/Bioinformatics Group, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Beutenbergstr, 11a,
D-07745 Jena, Germany. christoph.kaleta@uni-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Although Escherichia coli is one of the best studied model organisms,
a comprehensive understanding of its gene regulation is not yet achieved. There
exist many approaches to reconstruct regulatory interaction networks from gene
expression experiments. Mutual information based approaches are most useful for
large-scale network inference.
RESULTS: We used a three-step approach in which we combined gene regulatory
network inference based on directed information (DTI) and sequence analysis. DTI 
values were calculated on a set of gene expression profiles from 19 time course
experiments extracted from the Many Microbes Microarray Database. Focusing on
influences between pairs of genes in which one partner encodes a transcription
factor (TF) we derived a network which contains 878 TF - gene interactions of
which 166 are known according to RegulonDB. Afterward, we selected a subset of
109 interactions that could be confirmed by the presence of a phylogenetically
conserved binding site of the respective regulator. By this second step, the
fraction of known interactions increased from 19% to 60%. In the last step, we
checked the 44 of the 109 interactions not yet included in RegulonDB for
functional relationships between the regulator and the target and, thus, obtained
ten TF - target gene interactions. Five of them concern the regulator LexA and
have already been reported in the literature. The remaining five influences
describe regulations by Fis (with two novel targets), PhdR, PhoP, and KdgR. For
the validation of our approach, one of them, the regulation of lipoate synthase
(LipA) by the pyruvate-sensing pyruvate dehydrogenate repressor (PdhR), was
experimentally checked and confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: We predicted a set of five novel TF - target gene interactions in E.
coli. One of them, the regulation of lipA by the transcriptional regulator PdhR
was validated experimentally. Furthermore, we developed DTInfer, a new R-package 
for the inference of gene-regulatory networks from microarrays using directed
information.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116 
PMCID: PMC2936295
PMID: 20718955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Microbiol. 2007 Jun 8;7:53.

Identification of regulatory network topological units coordinating the
genome-wide transcriptional response to glucose in Escherichia coli.

Gutierrez-Ríos RM(1), Freyre-Gonzalez JA, Resendis O, Collado-Vides J, Saier M,
Gosset G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamentos de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apdo. Postal 510-3, Cuernavaca, Morelos,
México. rmaria@ibt.unam.mx

BACKGROUND: Glucose is the preferred carbon and energy source for Escherichia
coli. A complex regulatory network coordinates gene expression, transport and
enzyme activities in response to the presence of this sugar. To determine the
extent of the cellular response to glucose, we applied an approach combining
global transcriptome and regulatory network analyses.
RESULTS: Transcriptome data from isogenic wild type and crp- strains grown in
Luria-Bertani medium (LB) or LB + 4 g/L glucose (LB+G) were analyzed to identify 
differentially transcribed genes. We detected 180 and 200 genes displaying
increased and reduced relative transcript levels in the presence of glucose,
respectively. The observed expression pattern in LB was consistent with a
gluconeogenic metabolic state including active transport and interconversion of
small molecules and macromolecules, induction of protease-encoding genes and a
partial heat shock response. In LB+G, catabolic repression was detected for
transport and metabolic interconversion activities. We also detected an increased
capacity for de novo synthesis of nucleotides, amino acids and proteins. Cluster 
analysis of a subset of genes revealed that CRP mediates catabolite repression
for most of the genes displaying reduced transcript levels in LB+G, whereas Fis
participates in the upregulation of genes under this condition. An analysis of
the regulatory network, in terms of topological functional units, revealed 8
interconnected modules which again exposed the importance of Fis and CRP as
directly responsible for the coordinated response of the cell. This effect was
also seen with other not extensively connected transcription factors such as FruR
and PdhR, which showed a consistent response considering media composition.
CONCLUSION: This work allowed the identification of eight interconnected
regulatory network modules that includes CRP, Fis and other transcriptional
factors that respond directly or indirectly to the presence of glucose. In most
cases, each of these modules includes genes encoding physiologically related
functions, thus indicating a connection between regulatory network topology and
related cellular functions involved in nutrient sensing and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-7-53 
PMCID: PMC1905917
PMID: 17559662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1998 Aug;144 ( Pt 8):2113-2123. doi:
10.1099/00221287-144-8-2113.

Transcription and transcript processing in the sdhCDAB-sucABCD operon of
Escherichia coli.

Cunningham L(1), Guest JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of SheffieldWestern Bank, Sheffield S10 2TNUK.

The genes encoding succinate dehydrogenase (sdhCDAB), the specific components of 
the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (ODH, E1o and E2o; sucAB) and
succinyl-CoA synthetase (sucCD) form a cluster containing two promoters at 16.3
min in the chromosome of Escherichia coli: Psdh sdhCDAB-Psuc sucAB-sucCD. The
gene encoding the lipoamide dehydrogenase component of both the 2-oxoglutarate
and pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes (E3; lpdA) is the distal gene of another
cluster containing two promoters located at 2.7 min: Ppdh pdhR-aceEF-Plpd lpdA.
The responses of the suc and lpd promoters to different environmental conditions 
and to regulator defects were investigated with appropriate lacZ fusions, in
order to understand how expression of the sucAB genes is co-regulated with other 
genes in the sdhCDAB-sucABCD cluster and with lpdA expression. Expression from
the suc promoter was repressed by IHF and partially activated by sigma 38 but it 
was not regulated by ArcA, FNR, CRP, FruR or Fis, and not repressed by glucose or
anaerobiosis, indicating that the well-established catabolite and anaerobic
repression of ODH synthesis is imposed elsewhere. In contrast, the lpd promoter
was repressed by both glucose (via a CRP-independent mechanism) and anaerobiosis 
(mediated by ArcA), and activated by Fis, but it was not regulated by FNR, FruR, 
IHF or sigma 38. These observations support the view that transcription of the
sucABCD genes is primarily initiated and regulated at the upstream sdh promoter, 
and that the lpd promoter is independently co-regulated with Psdh (primarily by
ArcA-mediated repression) rather than with Psuc. Direct evidence for
co-transcription of the entire sdhCDAB-sucABCD region from Psdh was obtained by
detecting a 10 kb transcript in rnc and rne mutants, but not in the parental
strains. Three RNaseIII-specific processing sites, which contribute to the
extreme instability of the readthrough transcript, were identified in the
sdhCDAB-sucABCD intergenic region. Other sites of endonuclease processing were
located by interpreting the patterns of transcript subfragments observed in
Northern blotting.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-144-8-2113 
PMID: 9720032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (purH)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEBS Lett. 2020 Mar;594(5):791-798. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13643. Epub 2019 Nov
14.

Fis protein forms DNA topological barriers to confine transcription-coupled DNA
supercoiling in Escherichia coli.

Dages S(1), Zhi X(1), Leng F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Institute and Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,
Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.

Previously, we demonstrated that transcription-coupled DNA supercoiling (TCDS)
potently activated or inhibited nearby promoters in Escherichia coli even in the 
presence of all four DNA topoisomerases, suggesting that DNA topoisomerases are
not the only factors regulating TCDS. A different mechanism exists to confine
this localized DNA supercoiling. Using an in vivo system containing the
TCDS-activated leu-500 promoter (Pleu-500 ), we find that the nucleoid-associated
Fis protein potently inhibits the TCDS-mediated activation of Pleu-500 . We also 
find that deletion of the fis gene significantly enhances TCDS-mediated
inhibition of transcription of three genes purH, yieP, and yrdA divergently
coupled to different rrn operons in the early log phase. These results suggest
that Fis protein forms DNA topological barriers upon binding to its recognition
sites, blocks TCDS diffusion, and potently inhibits the TCDS-activated Pleu-500 .

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13643 
PMID: 31639222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (recF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Adv Biophys. 2004;38:3-20.

Illegitimate recombination mediated by double-strand break and end-joining in
Escherichia coli.

Ikeda H(1), Shiraishi K, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Medinet Inc, Tamagawadai 2-2-8, Setagaya-ku, 
Tokyo 158-0096, Japan. ikeda@medinet-inc.co.jp

The frequency of illegitimate recombination has been measured by a lambda bio
transducing phage assay during the induction of the E. coli lambda cI857 lysogen.
Illegitimate recombination falls into two classes, short homology-independent and
short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. The former involves
sequences with virtually no homology, and is mediated by DNA topoisomerases and
controlled by the DNA binding protein HU. The latter is induced by UV irradiation
or other DNA damaging agents and requires short regions of homology, usually
contain 4 to 13 base pairs, at sites involved in recombination. It has been shown
that the RecJ exonuclease promotes short homology-dependent illegitimate
recombination, but that the RecQ helicase suppresses it. In addition, we have
shown that the overexpression of RecE and RecT enhances the frequencies of
spontaneous and UV-induced illegitimate recombination and that the RecJ, RecF,
RecO, and RecR functions are required for this RecE-mediated illegitimate
recombination. Moreover, we have also indicated that RecQ plays a role in the
suppression of RecE-mediated illegitimate recombination, with the participation
of DnaB, Fis, ExoI, and H-NS. Models have been proposed for these modes of
recombination: the DNA gyrase subunit exchange model for short
homology-independent illegitimate recombination and the "double-strand break and 
join" model for short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. Many
features of these models remain to be tested in future studies.


PMID: 15493325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Adv Biophys. 2004;38(Complete):3-20.

Illegitimate recombination mediated by double-strand break and end-joining in
Escherichia coli.

Ikeda H(1), Shiraishi K, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Medinet Inc., Tamagawadai 2-2-8, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 158-0096, Japan.

The frequency of illegitimate recombination has been measured by a lambdabio
transducing phage assay during the induction of the E. coli lambda c1857 lysogen.
Illegitimate recombination falls into two classes, short homology-independent and
short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. The former involves
sequences with virtually no homology, and is mediated by DNA topoisomerases and
controlled by the DNA binding protein HU. The latter is induced by UV irradiation
or other DNA damaging agents and requires short regions of homology, usually
contain 4 to 13 base pairs, at sites involved in recombination. It has been shown
that the RecJ exonuclease promotes short homology-dependent illegitimate
recombination, but that the RecQ helicase suppresses it. In addition, we have
shown that the overexpression of RecE and RecT enhances the frequencies of
spontaneous and UV-induced illegitimate recombination and that the RecJ, RecF,
RecO, and RecR functions are required for this RecE-mediated illegitimate
recombination. Moreover, we have also indicated that RecQ plays a role in the
suppression of RecEmediated illegitimate recombination, with the participation of
DnaB, Fis, Exol, and H-NS. Models have been proposed for these modes of
recombination: the DNA gyrase subunit exchange model for short
homology-independent illegitimate recombination and the "double-strand break and 
join" model for short homologydependent illegitimate recombination. Many features
of these models remain to be tested in future studies.


PMID: 15476890 


3. J Bacteriol. 1996 Oct;178(20):6006-12.

Fis binding in the dnaA operon promoter region.

Froelich JM(1), Phuong TK, Zyskind JW.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department and Molecular Biology Institute, San Diego State
University, California 92182-4614, USA.

The region between the rpmH and dnaA genes contains five promoters that
divergently express the ribosomal protein L34 and the proteins of the dnaA
operon, including DnaA, the beta clamp of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, and
RecF. The DNA-binding protein Fis was shown by the band shift assay to bind near 
the rpmHp2 and dnaAp2 promoters and by DNase I footprinting to bind to a single
site in the dnaAp2 promoter overlapping the -35 and spacer sequences. There were 
no observable differences in Fis affinity or the angle of bending induced by Fis 
between methylated and unmethylated DNA fragments containing the Fis binding site
in the dnaAp2 promoter. Fis directly or indirectly represses the expression of
DnaA protein and the beta clamp of DNA polymerase III. A fis null mutant
containing a dnaA-lacZ in-frame fusion had twofold greater beta-galactosidase
activity than a fis wild-type strain, and induced expression of Fis eliminated
the increase in activity of the fusion protein. A two- to threefold increase in
the levels of DnaA and beta clamp proteins was found in a fis null mutant by
immunoblot gel analysis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.178.20.6006-6012.1996 
PMCID: PMC178459
PMID: 8830699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (surA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fliC) AND (fliC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Planta Med. 2021 Sep 14. doi: 10.1055/a-1585-6322. [Epub ahead of print]

Seven-day Oral Intake of Orthosiphon stamineus Leaves Infusion Exerts
Antiadhesive Ex Vivo Activity Against Uropathogenic E. coli in Urine Samples.

Deipenbrock M(1), Scotti F(2), Mo B(1), Heinrich M(2), Hensel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Münster, Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology and Phytochemistry,
Münster, Germany.
(2)Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, UCL School of Pharmacy, London, United
Kingdom.

Orthosiphon stamineus leaves (Java tea) extract is traditionally used for the
treatment of urinary tract infections. According to recent in vitro data, animal 
infection studies, and transcriptomic investigations, polymethoxylated flavones
from Java tea exert antiadhesive activity against uropathogenic Escherichia coli 
(UPEC). This antiadhesive activity has been shown to reduce bladder and kidney
lesion in a mice infection model. As no data on the antivirulent activity of Java
tea intake on humans are available, a biomedical study was performed on 20
healthy volunteers who self-administered Orthosiphon infusion (4 × 3 g per day,
orally) for 7 days. The herbal material used for the study conformed to the
specification of the European Pharmacopoeia, and ultra high-performance liquid
chromatography (UHPLC) of the infusion showed rosmarinic acid, caffeic acid, and 
cichoric acid to be the main compounds aside from polymethoxylated flavones.
Rosmarinic acid was quantified in the tea preparations with 243 ± 22 µg/mL,
indicating sufficient reproducibility of the preparation of the infusion. Urine
samples were obtained during the biomedical study on day 1 (control urine, prior 
to Java tea intake), 3, 6 and 8. Antiadhesive activity of the urine samples was
quantified by flowcytometric assay using pre-treated UPEC NU14 and human T24
bladder cells. Pooled urine samples indicated significant inhibition of bacterial
adhesion on day 3, 6 and 8. The urine samples had no influence on the invasion of
UPEC into host cells. Bacterial proliferation was slightly reduced after 24 h
incubation with the urine samples. Gene expression analysis (qPCR) revealed
strong induction of fitness and motility gene fliC and downregulation of hemin
uptake system chuT. These data correlate with previously reported datasets from
in vitro transcriptomic analysis. Increased bacterial motility was monitored
using a motility assay in soft agar with UPEC UTI89. The intake of Java tea had
no effect on the concentration of Tamm-Horsfall Protein in the urine samples. The
present study explains the antiadhesive and anti-infective effect of the plant
extract by triggering UPEC from a sessile lifestyle into a motile bacterial form,
with reduced adhesive capacity.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1585-6322 
PMID: 34521130 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.


2. Food Chem. 2021 Aug 27;369:130969. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130969. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inhibitory effect of modified atmosphere packaging on Escherichia coli O157:H7 in
fresh-cut cucumbers (Cucumis sativus L.) and effectively maintain quality during 
storage.

Sun Y(1), Zhao X(1), Ma Y(1), Guan H(1), Liang H(2), Wang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agri-food Processing and Nutrition, Beijing Vegetable Research
Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Products of Fruits and Vegetables Preservation and
Processing, Key Laboratory of Vegetable Postharvest Processing, Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Beijing 100097, China.
(2)Longda Food Group Co. LTD, Shandong 265231, China.
(3)Institute of Agri-food Processing and Nutrition, Beijing Vegetable Research
Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Products of Fruits and Vegetables Preservation and
Processing, Key Laboratory of Vegetable Postharvest Processing, Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Beijing 100097, China. Electronic address:
wangdan@nercv.org.

Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) can inhibit microbial growth and prolong
shelf life of fresh-cut cucumbers. This study compared the effects of different
packaging gases on the growth of E. coli O157:H7 and sensory characteristics of
fresh-cut cucumbers. Changes in key movement, adhesion, and oxidative stress
genes expression of strain under optimal MAP and air were determined. Cell
population density, the extracellular carbohydrate complex content and expression
of curli fimbriae were evaluated. Results revealed that the growth of E. coli
O157:H7 in fresh-cut cucumbers could be effectively inhibited under MAP
(atmosphere = 2% O2, 7% CO2, 91% N2), and better maintained the sensory
characteristics. Furthermore, the inhibition mechanism was revealed by inhibiting
the expression of movement (fliC), adhesion (eaeA) and oxidative stress (rpoS and
sodB) genes in E. coli O157:H7, reducing biofilm formation, extracellular
carbohydrate production and curli fimbriae expression. Proper MAP can maintain
the quality and safety of fresh-cut cucumbers.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.130969 
PMID: 34500206 


3. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2021 Sep 3. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2021.0033. [Epub ahead of
print]

Identification of Two New Sequences of Flagellin-Encoding Gene in Escherichia
coli Using PCR and Sequencing-Based Methods.

Rogé AD(1), Celi Castillo AB(1), van der Ploeg CA(1), Bordagorría XL(1), Padín
VM(1), Bruno SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Antígenos y Antisueros, Instituto Nacional de Producción de
Biológicos, ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán," Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Escherichia coli has traditionally been serotyped using antisera against the O
and H antigens. However, a proportion of E. coli isolates are nonmotile and, in
addition, some isolates do not react with the currently available H-typing sera. 
Alternative molecular methods have been developed based on the detection of genes
encoding for H antigens. In this study, we studied 13 serologically nontypable H 
antigen E. coli strains using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
sequencing-based methods. We found two new sequences of flagellin-encoding gene, 
for each of which a specific antiserum was produced to confirm their expression. 
Sequencing of the flagellin gene offers a rapid determination of E. coli H
antigens and could be used to detect potential novel flagellar antigens.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2021.0033 
PMID: 34491107 


4. Front Microbiol. 2021 Aug 17;12:659198. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.659198.
eCollection 2021.

YbfA Regulates the Sensitivity of Escherichia coli K12 to Plantaricin BM-1 via
the BasS/BasR Two-Component Regulatory System.

Chen X(1), Liu Y(1), Jin J(1), Liu H(1), Hao Y(2), Zhang H(1), Xie Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Agricultural Product Detection and Control of Spoilage Organisms and Pesticide
Residue, College of Food Science and Engineering, Beijing University of
Agriculture, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China.

Plantaricin BM-1, a class IIa bacteriocin produced by Lactobacillus plantarum
BM-1, shows obvious antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli. However, the
mechanism underlying the action of class IIa bacteriocins against gram-negative
bacteria remains to be explored. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
role of YbfA, a DUF2517 domain-containing protein, in the response of Escherichia
coli K12 to plantaricin BM-1. The growth curve experiment and MIC experiment
showed that the sensitivity of E. coli to plantaricin BM-1 was decreased by a
ybfA null mutation. Electron microscopy showed that the ybfA null mutation
reduced the surface rupture and contraction caused by plantaricin BM-1, and
mitigated the effect of plantaricin BM-1 on the morphology of the E. coli cell
membrane. Proteomics analysis showed that 323 proteins were differentially
expressed in E. coli lacking the ybfA gene (P < 0.05); 118 proteins were
downregulated, and 205 proteins were upregulated. The metabolic pathways
containing the upregulated proteins mainly included outer membrane proteins,
integral components of the plasma membrane, regulation of cell motility, and
regulation of locomotion. The metabolic pathways involving the downregulated
proteins mainly included outer membrane protein glycine betaine transport,
amino-acid betaine transport, and transmembrane signaling receptor activity. The 
results of the proteomics analysis showed that the protein expression of the
BasS/BasR two-component system was significantly increased (P < 0.05). Moreover, 
the expression levels of downstream proteins regulated by this two-component
system were also significantly increased, including DgkA, FliC, and MlaE, which
are involved in cell membrane structure and function, and RT-qPCR also confirmed 
this result. The growth curve showed that the sensitivity of E. coli to
plantaricin BM-1 was significantly increased due to deletion of the BasS/BasR
two-component system. Thus, deletion of ybfA in E. coli can increase the
expression of the BasS/BasR two-component system and positively regulate the
structure and function of the cell membrane to reduce the sensitivity to
plantaricin BM-1. This will help to explore the mechanism of action of class IIa 
bacteriocins against gram-negative bacteria.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Liu, Jin, Liu, Hao, Zhang and Xie.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.659198 
PMCID: PMC8415914
PMID: 34484135 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


5. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Jul 13;2021:9949697. doi: 10.1155/2021/9949697.
eCollection 2021.

Escherichia coli Aggravates Calcium Oxalate Stone Formation via
PPK1/Flagellin-Mediated Renal Oxidative Injury and Inflammation.

An L(1)(2), Wu W(2), Li S(2), Lai Y(2)(3), Chen D(2), He Z(1)(2), Chang Z(1)(2), 
Xu P(2), Huang Y(1)(2), Lei M(1)(2), Jiang Z(1)(2), Zeng T(2), Sun X(2), Sun
X(3), Duan X(2), Wu W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510260, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Minimally Invasive Surgery Center, Guangdong Key
Laboratory of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou 510230, China.
(3)Department of Urology, Shenzhen Shockwave Lithotripsy Research Institute, The 
Eighth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518033,
China.

Escherichia coli (E. coli) is closely associated with the formation of kidney
stones. However, the role of E. coli in CaOx stone formation is not well
understood. We explored whether E. coli facilitate CaOx stone formation and its
mechanism. Stone and urine cultures were reviewed from kidney stone formers. The 
ability of calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) aggregation was detected to evaluate
the influence of uropathogenic E. coli, then gel electrophoresis and nanoLC-MS/MS
to detect the crystal-adhered protein. Flagellin (Flic) and polyphosphate kinase 
1 (PPK1) were screened out following detection of their role on crystal
aggregation, oxidative injury, and inflammation of HK-2 cell in vitro. By
transurethral injection of wild-type, Ppk1 mutant and Flic mutant strains of E.
coli and intraperitoneally injected with glyoxylate in C57BL/6J female mice to
establish an animal model. We found that E. coli was the most common bacterial
species in patients with CaOx stone. It could enhance CaOx crystal aggregation
both in vitro and in vivo. Flagellin was identified as the key molecules
regulated by PPK1, and both of them could facilitate the crystal aggregation and 
mediated HK-2 cell oxidative injury and activated the inflammation-related
NF-κB/P38 signaling pathway. Wild-type strain of E. coli injection significantly 
increased CaOx deposition and enhanced oxidative injury and inflammation-related 
protein expression, and this effect could be reversed by Ppk1 or Flic mutation.
In conclusion, E. coli promotes CaOx stone formation via enhancing oxidative
injury and inflammation regulated by the PPK1/flagellin, which activated
NF-κB/P38 pathways, providing new potential drug targets for the renal CaOx
calculus precaution and treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Lingyue An et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9949697 
PMCID: PMC8292073
PMID: 34336124 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


6. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 9;11(1):14215. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-93305-6.

In silico designing of vaccine candidate against Clostridium difficile.

Basak S(#)(1), Deb D(#)(1), Narsaria U(#)(1), Kar T(#)(1), Castiglione F(2),
Sanyal I(1), Bade PD(3), Srivastava AP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biopharmaceutical Development Department, Syngene International Limited,
Bangalore, India.
(2)Institute for Applied Computing (IAC), National Research Council of Italy,
Rome, Italy.
(3)Biopharmaceutical Development Department, Syngene International Limited,
Bangalore, India. Pratap.Bade@syngeneintl.com.
(4)Biopharmaceutical Development Department, Syngene International Limited,
Bangalore, India. Anurag.Srivastava@syngeneintl.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming gram-positive bacterium, recognized as
the primary cause of antibiotic-associated nosocomial diarrhoea. Clostridium
difficile infection (CDI) has emerged as a major health-associated infection with
increased incidence and hospitalization over the years with high mortality rates.
Contamination and infection occur after ingestion of vegetative spores, which
germinate in the gastro-intestinal tract. The surface layer protein and flagellar
proteins are responsible for the bacterial colonization while the spore coat
protein, is associated with spore colonization. Both these factors are the main
concern of the recurrence of CDI in hospitalized patients. In this study, the
CotE, SlpA and FliC proteins are chosen to form a multivalent, multi-epitopic,
chimeric vaccine candidate using the immunoinformatics approach. The overall
reliability of the candidate vaccine was validated in silico and the molecular
dynamics simulation verified the stability of the vaccine designed. Docking
studies showed stable vaccine interactions with Toll-Like Receptors of innate
immune cells and MHC receptors. In silico codon optimization of the vaccine and
its insertion in the cloning vector indicates a competent expression of the
modelled vaccine in E. coli expression system. An in silico immune simulation
system evaluated the effectiveness of the candidate vaccine to trigger a
protective immune response.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-93305-6 
PMCID: PMC8271013
PMID: 34244557 


7. Pathogens. 2021 Jun 29;10(7). pii: 817. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10070817.

How Bacteria Change after Exposure to Silver Nanoformulations: Analysis of the
Genome and Outer Membrane Proteome.

Kędziora A(1), Speruda M(1), Wernecki M(1), Dudek B(1), Kapczynska K(2),
Krzyżewska E(2), Rybka J(2), Bugla-Płoskońska G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of
Wroclaw, 51-148 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Immunology of Infectious Diseases, Hirszfeld Institute of
Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, 
Poland.

OBJECTIVE: the main purpose of this work was to compare the genetic and
phenotypic changes of E. coli treated with silver nanoformulations (E. coli
BW25113 wt, E. coli BW25113 AgR, E. coli J53, E. coli ATCC 11229 wt, E. coli ATCC
11229 var. S2 and E. coli ATCC 11229 var. S7). Silver, as the metal with
promising antibacterial properties, is currently widely used in medicine and the 
biomedical industry, in both ionic and nanoparticles forms. Silver
nanoformulations are usually considered as one type of antibacterial agent, but
their physical and chemical properties determine the way of interactions with the
bacterial cell, the mode of action, and the bacterial cell response to silver.
METHODS: the changes in the bacterial genome, resulting from the treatment of
bacteria with various silver nanoformulations, were verified by analyzing of
genes (selected with mutfunc) and their conservative and non-conservative
mutations selected with BLOSUM62. The phenotype was verified using an outer
membrane proteome analysis (OMP isolation, 2-DE electrophoresis, and MS protein
identification).
RESULTS: the variety of genetic and phenotypic changes in E. coli strains depends
on the type of silver used for bacteria treatment. The most changes were
identified in E. coli ATCC 11229 treated with silver nanoformulation signed as S2
(E. coli ATCC 11229 var. S2). We pinpointed 39 genes encoding proteins located in
the outer membrane, 40 genes of their regulators, and 22 genes related to other
outer membrane structures, such as flagellum, fimbria, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
or exopolysaccharide in this strain. Optical density of OmpC protein in E. coli
electropherograms decreased after exposure to silver nanoformulation S7 (noticed 
in E. coli ATCC 11229 var. S7), and increased after treatment with the other
silver nanoformulations (SNF) marked as S2 (noticed in E. coli ATCC 11229 var.
S2). Increase of FliC protein optical density was identified in turn after Ag+
treatment (noticed in E.coli AgR).
CONCLUSION: the results show that silver nanoformulations (SNF) exerts a
selective pressure on bacteria causing both conservative and non-conservative
mutations. The proteomic approach revealed that the levels of some proteins have 
changed after treatment with appropriate SNF.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10070817 
PMCID: PMC8308822
PMID: 34209937 


8. Infect Immun. 2021 May 17;89(6). pii: e00721-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00721-20. Print
2021 May 17.

Roles of OmpX, an Outer Membrane Protein, on Virulence and Flagellar Expression
in Uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Suzue K(2), Takita A(3), Kamitani W(2), Tomita H(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Gunma University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan hirakawa@gunma-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Host Defense, Gunma University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, Gunma University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Bacterial Drug Resistance, Gunma University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) is a major pathogen that causes urinary
tract infection (UTI). This bacterium adheres to and internalizes within urinary 
tract cells, where it aggregates and subsequently forms biofilm-like
multicellular colonies that protect UPEC from antimicrobial agents and the host's
immune system. Here, we show that OmpX, an outer membrane protein, plays a role
in the pathogenesis of UPEC in renal cells. Deletion of ompX decreased bacterial 
internalization and aggregation within kidney epithelial cells and also impaired 
the colonization of mouse urinary tracts, but the ompX mutant still adhered to
the epithelial cells at a level similar to that of the parent strain. FlhD, the
master regulator of flagellum-related genes, had a low expression level in the
ompX mutant compared to the parent strain, and the ompX mutant exhibited
defective motility due to lower flagellar production than the parent strain. The 
fliC mutant, which lacks flagella, exhibited lower levels of bacterial
internalization and aggregation than the parent strain. Additional deletion of
ompX in the fliC mutant did not further decrease bacterial internalization. These
combined results suggest that OmpX contributes to flagellar production in UPEC
and then sustains UPEC virulence associated with bacterial internalization and
aggregation within urinary tract cells and colonization in the urinary tract.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00721-20 
PMCID: PMC8316124 [Available on 2021-11-17]
PMID: 33753414 


9. mBio. 2021 Mar 9;12(2). pii: e03605-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03605-20.

A Novel Small RNA Promotes Motility and Virulence of Enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli O157:H7 in Response to Ammonium.

Jia T(1)(2), Liu B(1)(2)(3)(4), Mu H(1)(2), Qian C(1)(2), Wang L(1)(2), Li
L(1)(2), Lu G(1)(2), Zhu W(1)(2), Guo X(1)(2)(3)(4), Yang B(1)(2)(3)(4), Huang
D(1)(2)(3)(4), Feng L(1)(2)(3)(4), Liu B(5)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(2)TEDA Institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University,
TEDA, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(3)Center for Microbial Functional Genomics and Detection Technology, Ministry of
Education, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(4)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics, Tianjin, People's
Republic of China.
(5)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, Tianjin, People's Republic of China liubin1981@nankai.edu.cn.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli serotype O157:H7 (O157) is a critical,
foodborne, human intestinal pathogen that causes severe acute hemorrhagic
diarrhea, abdominal cramping, and even death. Small RNAs (sRNAs) are noncoding
regulatory molecules that sense environmental changes and trigger various
virulence-related signaling pathways; however, few such sRNAs have been
identified in O157. Here, we report a novel sRNA, EsrF that senses high ammonium 
concentrations in the colon and enhances O157 pathogenicity by promoting
bacterial motility and adhesion to host cells. Specifically, EsrF was found to
directly interact with the 5' untranslated regions of the flagellar biosynthetic 
gene, flhB, mRNA and increase its abundance, thereby upregulating expression of
essential flagellar genes, including flhD, flhC, fliA, and fliC, leading to
elevated O157 motility and virulence. Meanwhile, an infant rabbit model of O157
infection showed that deletion of esrF and flhB significantly attenuates O157
pathogenicity. Furthermore, NtrC-the response regulator of the NtrC/B
two-component system-was found to exert direct, negative regulation of esrF
expression. Meanwhile, high ammonium concentrations in the colon release the
inhibitory effect of NtrC on esrF, thereby enhancing its expression and
subsequently promoting bacterial colonization in the host colon. Our work reveals
a novel, sRNA-centered, virulence-related signaling pathway in O157 that senses
high ammonium concentrations. These findings provide novel insights for future
research on O157 pathogenesis and targeted treatment strategies.IMPORTANCE The
process by which bacteria sense environmental cues to regulate their virulence is
complex. Several studies have focused on regulating the expression of the locus
of enterocyte effacement pathogenicity island in the typical gut pathogenic
bacterium, O157. However, few investigations have addressed the regulation of
other virulence factors in response to intestinal signals. In this study, we
report our discovery of a novel O157 sRNA, EsrF, and demonstrate that it
contributed to bacterial motility and virulence in vitro and in vivo through the 
regulation of bacterial flagellar synthesis. Furthermore, we show that high
ammonium concentrations in the colon induced esrF expression to promote bacterial
virulence by releasing the repression of esrF by NtrC. This study highlights the 
importance of sRNA in regulating the motility and pathogenicity of O157.

Copyright © 2021 Jia et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03605-20 
PMCID: PMC8092317
PMID: 33688013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 12;12:557455. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.557455.
eCollection 2021.

Reciprocal Packaging of the Main Structural Proteins of Type 1 Fimbriae and
Flagella in the Outer Membrane Vesicles of "Wild Type" Escherichia coli Strains.

Blackburn SA(1), Shepherd M(1), Robinson GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom.

Fundamental aspects of outer membrane vesicle (OMV) biogenesis and the
engineering of producer strains have been major research foci for many in recent 
years. The focus of this study was OMV production in a variety of Escherichia
coli strains including wild type (WT) (K12 and BW25113), mutants (from the Keio
collection) and proprietary [BL21 and BL21 (DE3)] strains. The present study
investigated the proteome and prospective mechanism that underpinned the key
finding that the dominant protein present in E. coli K-12 WT OMVs was fimbrial
protein monomer (FimA) (a polymerizable protein which is the key structural
monomer from which Type 1 fimbriae are made). However, mutations in genes
involved in fimbriae biosynthesis (ΔfimA, B, C, and F) resulted in the packaging 
of flagella protein monomer (FliC) (the major structural protein of flagella)
into OMVs instead of FimA. Other mutations (ΔfimE, G, H, I, and ΔlrhA-a
transcriptional regulator of fimbriation and flagella biosynthesis) lead to the
packaging of both FimA and Flagellin into the OMVs. In the majority of instances 
shown within this research, the production of OMVs is considered in K-12 WT
strains where structural appendages including fimbriae or flagella are temporally
co-expressed throughout the growth curve as shown previously in the literature.
The hypothesis, proposed and supported within the present paper, is that the
vesicular packaging of the major FimA is reciprocally regulated with the major
FliC in E. coli K-12 OMVs but this is abrogated in a range of mutated, non-WT E. 
coli strains. We also demonstrate, that a protein of interest (GFP) can be
targeted to OMVs in an E. coli K-12 strain by protein fusion with FimA and that
this causes normal packaging to be disrupted. The findings and underlying
implications for host interactions and use in biotechnology are discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Blackburn, Shepherd and Robinson.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.557455 
PMCID: PMC7907004
PMID: 33643229 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


############# ((fnr) AND (hemN)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2005 May;187(10):3329-38.

Transcription activation in vitro by the Bradyrhizobium japonicum regulatory
protein FixK2.

Mesa S(1), Ucurum Z, Hennecke H, Fischer HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, CH-8093
Zürich, Switzerland. mesam@micro.biol.ethz.ch

In Bradyrhizobium japonicum, the N2-fixing root nodule endosymbiont of soybean, a
group of genes required for microaerobic, anaerobic, or symbiotic growth is
controlled by FixK2, a key regulator that is part of the FixLJ-FixK2 cascade.
FixK2 belongs to the family of cyclic AMP receptor protein/fumarate and nitrate
reductase (CRP/FNR) transcription factors that recognize a palindromic DNA motif 
(CRP/FNR box) associated with the regulated promoters. Here, we report on a
biochemical analysis of FixK2 and its transcription activation activity in vitro.
FixK2 was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified as a soluble N-terminally
histidine-tagged protein. Gel filtration experiments revealed that increasing the
protein concentration shifts the monomer-dimer equilibrium toward the dimer.
Purified FixK2 productively interacted with the B. japonicum sigma80-RNA
polymerase holoenzyme, but not with E. coli sigma70-RNA polymerase holoenzyme, to
activate transcription from the B. japonicum fixNOQP, fixGHIS, and hemN2
promoters in vitro. Furthermore, FixK2 activated transcription from the E. coli
FF(-41.5) model promoter, again only in concert with B. japonicum RNA polymerase.
All of these promoters are so-called class II CRP/FNR-type promoters. We showed
by specific mutagenesis that the FixK2 box at nucleotide position -40.5 in the
hemN2 promoter, but not that at -78.5, is crucial for activation both in vivo and
in vitro, which argues against recognition of a potential class III promoter.
Given the lack of any evidence for the presence of a cofactor in purified FixK2, 
we surmise that FixK2 alone is sufficient to activate in vitro transcription to
at least a basal level. This contrasts with all well-studied CRP/FNR-type
proteins, which do require coregulators.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.10.3329-3338.2005 
PMCID: PMC1112000
PMID: 15866917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 1999 Mar;31(6):1681-94.

Multiple transcription factors of the FNR family in denitrifying Pseudomonas
stutzeri: characterization of four fnr-like genes, regulatory responses and
cognate metabolic processes.

Vollack KU(1), Härtig E, Körner H, Zumft WG.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Karlsruhe, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Microbiol 1999 Jul;33(2):442.

Pseudomonas stutzeri is a facultative anaerobic bacterium with the capability of 
denitrification. In searching for regulators that control the expression of this 
trait in response to oxygen withdrawal, we have found an unprecedented
multiplicity of four genes encoding transcription factors of the FNR family. The 
fnrA gene encodes a genuine FNR-type regulator, which is expressed constitutively
and controls the cytochrome cbb3-type terminal oxidase (the cco operon),
cytochrome c peroxidase (the ccp gene) and the oxygen-independent
coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (the hemN gene), in addition to its previously
demonstrated role in arginine catabolism (the arc operon). The fnr homologues
dnrD, dnrE and dnrS encode regulators of a new subgroup within the FNR family.
Their main distinctive feature is the lack of cysteine residues for complexing
the [4Fe-4S] centre of redox-active FNR-type regulators. However, they form a
phylogenetic lineage separate from the FixK branch of FNR proteins, which also
lack this cysteine signature. We have studied the expression of the dnr genes
under aerobic, oxygen-limited and denitrifying conditions. DnrD is a key
regulator of denitrification by selective activation of the genes for cytochrome 
cd1 nitrite reductase and NO reductase. The dnrD gene is part of the 30 kb region
carrying denitrification genes of P. stutzeri. Transcription of dnrD was
activated in O2-limited cells and particularly strongly in denitrifying cells,
but was not under the control of FnrA. In response to denitrifying growth
conditions, dnrD was transcribed as part of an operon together with genes
downstream and upstream of dnrD. dnrS was found about 9 kb upstream of dnrD, next
to the nrdD gene for anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase. The transcription of
dnrS required FnrA in O2-limited cells. Mutation of dnrS affected nrdD and the
expression of ferredoxin I as an element of the oxidative stress response. The
dnrE gene is part of the nar region encoding functions for respiratory nitrate
reduction. We found the highest amount of dnrE transcripts in aerobically
nitrate-challenged cells. The gene was transcribed from two promoters, P1 and P2,
of which promoter P1 was under the control of the nitrate response regulator
NarL. The multiplicity of FNR factors in P. stutzeri underlines the versatility
of the FNR scaffold to serve for transcriptional regulation directed at anaerobic
or nitrate-activated metabolic processes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01302.x 
PMID: 10209742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1998 Feb;144 ( Pt 2):441-448. doi:
10.1099/00221287-144-2-441.

Localization of denitrification genes on the chromosomal map of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Vollack KU(1), Xie J(1), Härtig E(1), Römling U(2), Zumft WG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Fridericiana, D-76128 Karlsruhe,
Germany.
(2)Karolinska Institutet, MTC, Department of Bacteriology, Box 280, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Cleavage of chromosomal DNA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO by Spel and Dpnl has 
been used together with PFGE and Southern hybridization to establish the map
location of the following principal denitrification genes: narGH (encoding the
large and small subunits of respiratory nitrate reductase), nirS (cytochrome-cd1 
nitrite reductase), nirE (uroporphyrinogen-III methyltransferase for haem d1
biosynthesis), norCB (nitric-oxide reductase complex), nosZ (nitrous-oxide
reductase) and nosA (an outer-membrane protein and OprC homologue). The study
also included several genes related to anaerobic or microaerophilic metabolism:
napA (encoding the catalytic subunit of the periplasmic nitrate reductase), ccoN 
(catalytic subunit of the cytochrome-cbb3 oxidase), hemN (oxygen-independent
coproporphyrinogen-III oxidase), an fnr-like regulatory gene, and azu and fdxA
(electron carriers azurin and ferredoxin, respectively). Genes necessary for
denitrification are concentrated at 20 to 36 min on the P. aeruginosa chromosome,
where they form three separate loci, the nir-nor, nar and nos gene clusters.
Genomic DNA of Pseudomonas stutzeri ZoBell was also subjected to Spel restriction
and Southern analysis to assign denitrification genes to individual fragments. A 
homologue of nosA encoding a putative component of the Cu-processing apparatus
for nitrous-oxide reductase was identified. In both P. aeruginosa and P. stutzeri
there is evidence for the linkage of anr (fnrA) with hemN and ccoN; and for the
presence of a napA gene.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-144-2-441 
PMID: 9493381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fnr) AND (hypA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Nov 7;228(1):81-6.

FNR-mediated regulation of hyp expression in Escherichia coli.

Messenger SL(1), Green J.

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The hypA-E operon is involved in the maturation of all three NiFe hydrogenases in
Escherichia coli. Two hyp promoters have been described; a sigma54-dependent
promoter upstream of hypA, and a sigma70-dependent promoter (PhypA) within the
hypA coding region. Here it is shown that the oxygen-responsive transcription
factor FNR regulates PhypA under anaerobic conditions only. PhypA does not
possess a canonical FNR recognition sequence, but two FNR half-sites are present.
Studies using PHYPA::lacZ fusions carrying lesions in one or both FNR half-sites 
indicated that although some residual anaerobic activity was retained by the
promoter containing only the downstream FNR half-site, both half-sites are
required for maximal PhypA activity in vivo. In vitro gel retardation analysis
suggested that the primary interaction occurs at the downstream FNR half-site.
Possible explanations for these observations and the implications for other
FNR-regulated promoters are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00726-2 
PMID: 14612240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 1991 Jan;5(1):123-35.

Molecular characterization of an operon (hyp) necessary for the activity of the
three hydrogenase isoenzymes in Escherichia coli.

Lutz S(1), Jacobi A, Schlensog V, Böhm R, Sawers G, Böck A.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität München, FRG.

The 58/59 min region of the Escherichia coli chromosome contains two divergently 
oriented gene clusters coding for proteins with a function in hydrogenase
formation. One cluster (the hyc operon), transcribed counterclockwise with
respect to the E. coli chromosome, codes for gene products with a structural role
in hydrogenase 3 formation (Böhm et al., 1990). The nucleotide sequence of the
divergently transcribed operon (hyp) has been determined. It contains five genes,
all of which are expressed in vivo in a T7 promoter/polymerase system, and the
sizes of the synthesized products correspond with those predicted from the amino 
acid sequence. Complementation analysis of previously characterized mutants
showed that the hypB, hypC and hypD genes have a function in the formation of all
three hydrogenase isoenzymes, lesions in hypB being complemented by high nickel
ion concentration in the medium. Prevention of hypBCDE gene expression led to an 
altered electrophoretic pattern of hydrogenase 1 and 2 constituent subunits,
indicating increased chemical or proteolytic subunits, Under fermentative growth 
conditions, operon expression was governed by an NtrA-dependent promoter lying
upstream of hypA working together with an fnr gene product-dependent promoter
which was localized within the hypA gene. The latter (operon-internal) promoter
is responsible for hypBCDE transcription under non-fermentative conditions when
the -24/-12 NtrA-dependent promoter upstream of hypA is silent.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1991.tb01833.x 
PMID: 1849603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frlR) AND (frlR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Feb;115(2):175-190. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14608. Epub 2020 Oct 14.

Transcriptional regulation of the Nε -fructoselysine metabolism in Escherichia
coli by global and substrate-specific cues.

Graf von Armansperg B(1), Koller F(1), Gericke N(1), Hellwig M(2), Jagtap PKA(3),
Heermann R(4), Hennig J(3), Henle T(2), Lassak J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology I, Microbiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Munich, Germany.
(2)Chair of Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Physiology, Microbiology and Wine Research, Johannes
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Thermally processed food is an important part of the human diet. Heat-treatment, 
however, promotes the formation of so-called Amadori rearrangement products, such
as fructoselysine. The gut microbiota including Escherichia coli can utilize
these compounds as a nutrient source. While the degradation route for
fructoselysine is well described, regulation of the corresponding pathway genes
frlABCD remained poorly understood. Here, we used bioinformatics combined with
molecular and biochemical analyses and show that fructoselysine metabolism in E. 
coli is tightly controlled at the transcriptional level. The global regulator CRP
(CAP) as well as the alternative sigma factor σ32 (RpoH) contribute to promoter
activation at high cAMP-levels and inside warm-blooded hosts, respectively. In
addition, we identified and characterized a transcriptional regulator FrlR,
encoded adjacent to frlABCD, as fructoselysine-6-phosphate specific repressor.
Our study provides profound evidence that the interplay of global and
substrate-specific regulation is a perfect adaptation strategy to efficiently
utilize unusual substrates within the human gut environment.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14608 
PMID: 32979851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (frmA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 9;6:38879. doi: 10.1038/srep38879.

The mechanism of a formaldehyde-sensing transcriptional regulator.

Denby KJ(1), Iwig J(2), Bisson C(1), Westwood J(1), Rolfe MD(1), Sedelnikova
SE(1), Higgins K(3), Maroney MJ(3), Baker PJ(1), Chivers PT(2)(4), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University
School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, Amherst, MA
01003, USA.
(4)Departments of Biosciences and Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, 
UK.

Most organisms are exposed to the genotoxic chemical formaldehyde, either from
endogenous or environmental sources. Therefore, biology has evolved systems to
perceive and detoxify formaldehyde. The frmRA(B) operon that is present in many
bacteria represents one such system. The FrmR protein is a transcriptional
repressor that is specifically inactivated in the presence of formaldehyde,
permitting expression of the formaldehyde detoxification machinery (FrmA and
FrmB, when the latter is present). The X-ray structure of the
formaldehyde-treated Escherichia coli FrmR (EcFrmR) protein reveals the formation
of methylene bridges that link adjacent Pro2 and Cys35 residues in the EcFrmR
tetramer. Methylene bridge formation has profound effects on the pattern of
surface charge of EcFrmR and combined with biochemical/biophysical data suggests 
a mechanistic model for formaldehyde-sensing and derepression of frmRA(B)
expression in numerous bacterial species.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38879 
PMCID: PMC5146963
PMID: 27934966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6714-20.

Global transcriptional effects of a suppressor tRNA and the inactivation of the
regulator frmR.

Herring CD(1), Blattner FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 445 Henry Mall,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Expression of an amber suppressor tRNA should result in read-through of the 326
open reading frames (ORFs) that terminate with amber stop codons in the
Escherichia coli genome, including six pseudogenes. Abnormal extension of an ORF 
might alter the activities of the protein and have effects on cellular
physiology, while suppression of a pseudogene could lead to a gain of function.
We used oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if any effects were apparent at 
the level of transcription in glucose minimal medium. Surprisingly, only eight
genes had significantly different expression in the presence of the suppressor.
Among these were the genes yaiN, adhC, and yaiM, forming a single putative operon
whose likely function is the degradation of formaldehyde. Expression of wild-type
yaiN was shown to result in repression of the operon, while a
suppression-mimicking allele lacking the amber stop codon and extended 7 amino
acids did not. The operon was shown to be induced by formaldehyde, and the genes 
have been renamed frmR, frmA, and frmB, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6714-6720.2004 
PMCID: PMC522192
PMID: 15466022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (frmR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2018 Jan;115(1):206-215. doi: 10.1002/bit.26455. Epub 2017 Nov
3.

Development of a formaldehyde biosensor with application to synthetic
methylotrophy.

Woolston BM(1), Roth T(2)(3)(4), Kohale I(5), Liu DR(2)(3)(4), Stephanopoulos
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.
(3)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Engineering, MIT, Cambridge 02139, USA.

Formaldehyde is a prevalent environmental toxin and a key intermediate in single 
carbon metabolism. The ability to monitor formaldehyde concentration is,
therefore, of interest for both environmental monitoring and for metabolic
engineering of native and synthetic methylotrophs, but current methods suffer
from low sensitivity, complex workflows, or require expensive analytical
equipment. Here we develop a formaldehyde biosensor based on the FrmR repressor
protein and cognate promoter of Escherichia coli. Optimization of the native
repressor binding site and regulatory architecture enabled detection at levels as
low as 1 µM. We then used the sensor to benchmark the in vivo activity of several
NAD-dependent methanol dehydrogenase (Mdh) variants, the rate-limiting enzyme
that catalyzes the first step of methanol assimilation. In order to use this
biosensor to distinguish individuals in a mixed population of Mdh variants, we
developed a strategy to prevent cross-talk by using glutathione as a formaldehyde
sink to minimize intercellular formaldehyde diffusion. Finally, we applied this
biosensor to balance expression of mdh and the formaldehyde assimilation enzymes 
hps and phi in an engineered E. coli strain to minimize formaldehyde build-up
while also reducing the burden of heterologous expression. This biosensor offers 
a quick and simple method for sensitively detecting formaldehyde, and has the
potential to be used as the basis for directed evolution of Mdh and dynamic
formaldehyde control strategies for establishing synthetic methylotrophy.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.26455 
PMCID: PMC5699943
PMID: 28921510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 9;6:38879. doi: 10.1038/srep38879.

The mechanism of a formaldehyde-sensing transcriptional regulator.

Denby KJ(1), Iwig J(2), Bisson C(1), Westwood J(1), Rolfe MD(1), Sedelnikova
SE(1), Higgins K(3), Maroney MJ(3), Baker PJ(1), Chivers PT(2)(4), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University
School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, Amherst, MA
01003, USA.
(4)Departments of Biosciences and Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, 
UK.

Most organisms are exposed to the genotoxic chemical formaldehyde, either from
endogenous or environmental sources. Therefore, biology has evolved systems to
perceive and detoxify formaldehyde. The frmRA(B) operon that is present in many
bacteria represents one such system. The FrmR protein is a transcriptional
repressor that is specifically inactivated in the presence of formaldehyde,
permitting expression of the formaldehyde detoxification machinery (FrmA and
FrmB, when the latter is present). The X-ray structure of the
formaldehyde-treated Escherichia coli FrmR (EcFrmR) protein reveals the formation
of methylene bridges that link adjacent Pro2 and Cys35 residues in the EcFrmR
tetramer. Methylene bridge formation has profound effects on the pattern of
surface charge of EcFrmR and combined with biochemical/biophysical data suggests 
a mechanistic model for formaldehyde-sensing and derepression of frmRA(B)
expression in numerous bacterial species.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38879 
PMCID: PMC5146963
PMID: 27934966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19806-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Generating a Metal-responsive Transcriptional Regulator to Test What Confers
Metal Sensing in Cells.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Chakrabarti B(1), Foster AW(1),
Lurie-Luke E(3), Huggins TG(2), Robinson NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Centre, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040, and.
(3)Life Sciences Open Innovation, London Innovation Centre, Procter and Gamble
Technical Centres, Ltd., Egham TW20 9NW, United Kingdom.
(4)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (a CsoR/RcnR-like
transcriptional de-repressor) is shown to repress the frmRA operator-promoter,
and repression is alleviated by formaldehyde but not manganese, iron, cobalt,
nickel, copper, or Zn(II) within cells. In contrast, repression by a mutant
FrmRE64H (which gains an RcnR metal ligand) is alleviated by cobalt and Zn(II).
Unexpectedly, FrmR was found to already bind Co(II), Zn(II), and Cu(I), and
moreover metals, as well as formaldehyde, trigger an allosteric response that
weakens DNA affinity. However, the sensory metal sites of the cells' endogenous
metal sensors (RcnR, ZntR, Zur, and CueR) are all tighter than FrmR for their
cognate metals. Furthermore, the endogenous metal sensors are shown to
out-compete FrmR. The metal-sensing FrmRE64H mutant has tighter metal affinities 
than FrmR by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Gain of cobalt sensing by
FrmRE64H remains enigmatic because the cobalt affinity of FrmRE64H is
substantially weaker than that of the endogenous cobalt sensor. Cobalt sensing
requires glutathione, which may assist cobalt access, conferring a kinetic
advantage. For Zn(II), the metal affinity of FrmRE64H approaches the metal
affinities of cognate Zn(II) sensors. Counter-intuitively, the allosteric
coupling free energy for Zn(II) is smaller in metal-sensing FrmRE64H compared
with nonsensing FrmR. By determining the copies of FrmR and FrmRE64H tetramers
per cell, then estimating promoter occupancy as a function of intracellular
Zn(II) concentration, we show how a modest tightening of Zn(II) affinity, plus
weakened DNA affinity of the apoprotein, conspires to make the relative
properties of FrmRE64H (compared with ZntR and Zur) sufficient to sense Zn(II)
inside cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427 
PMCID: PMC4528141
PMID: 26109070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Front Microbiol. 2014 Aug 13;5:402. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00402. eCollection
2014.

Aromatic inhibitors derived from ammonia-pretreated lignocellulose hinder
bacterial ethanologenesis by activating regulatory circuits controlling inhibitor
efflux and detoxification.

Keating DH(1), Zhang Y(1), Ong IM(1), McIlwain S(1), Morales EH(2), Grass JA(3), 
Tremaine M(1), Bothfeld W(1), Higbee A(1), Ulbrich A(4), Balloon AJ(4), Westphall
MS(5), Aldrich J(6), Lipton MS(6), Kim J(7), Moskvin OV(1), Bukhman YV(1), Coon
JJ(8), Kiley PJ(2), Bates DM(1), Landick R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison,
WI, USA ; Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI,
USA.
(6)Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Richland, WA, USA.
(7)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.
(8)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.
(9)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA ; Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, USA.

Efficient microbial conversion of lignocellulosic hydrolysates to biofuels is a
key barrier to the economically viable deployment of lignocellulosic biofuels. A 
chief contributor to this barrier is the impact on microbial processes and energy
metabolism of lignocellulose-derived inhibitors, including phenolic carboxylates,
phenolic amides (for ammonia-pretreated biomass), phenolic aldehydes, and
furfurals. To understand the bacterial pathways induced by inhibitors present in 
ammonia-pretreated biomass hydrolysates, which are less well studied than
acid-pretreated biomass hydrolysates, we developed and exploited synthetic mimics
of ammonia-pretreated corn stover hydrolysate (ACSH). To determine regulatory
responses to the inhibitors normally present in ACSH, we measured transcript and 
protein levels in an Escherichia coli ethanologen using RNA-seq and quantitative 
proteomics during fermentation to ethanol of synthetic hydrolysates containing or
lacking the inhibitors. Our study identified four major regulators mediating
these responses, the MarA/SoxS/Rob network, AaeR, FrmR, and YqhC. Induction of
these regulons was correlated with a reduced rate of ethanol production, buildup 
of pyruvate, depletion of ATP and NAD(P)H, and an inhibition of xylose
conversion. The aromatic aldehyde inhibitor 5-hydroxymethylfurfural appeared to
be reduced to its alcohol form by the ethanologen during fermentation, whereas
phenolic acid and amide inhibitors were not metabolized. Together, our findings
establish that the major regulatory responses to lignocellulose-derived
inhibitors are mediated by transcriptional rather than translational regulators, 
suggest that energy consumed for inhibitor efflux and detoxification may limit
biofuel production, and identify a network of regulators for future synthetic
biology efforts.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00402 
PMCID: PMC4132294
PMID: 25177315 


7. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6714-20.

Global transcriptional effects of a suppressor tRNA and the inactivation of the
regulator frmR.

Herring CD(1), Blattner FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 445 Henry Mall,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Expression of an amber suppressor tRNA should result in read-through of the 326
open reading frames (ORFs) that terminate with amber stop codons in the
Escherichia coli genome, including six pseudogenes. Abnormal extension of an ORF 
might alter the activities of the protein and have effects on cellular
physiology, while suppression of a pseudogene could lead to a gain of function.
We used oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if any effects were apparent at 
the level of transcription in glucose minimal medium. Surprisingly, only eight
genes had significantly different expression in the presence of the suppressor.
Among these were the genes yaiN, adhC, and yaiM, forming a single putative operon
whose likely function is the degradation of formaldehyde. Expression of wild-type
yaiN was shown to result in repression of the operon, while a
suppression-mimicking allele lacking the amber stop codon and extended 7 amino
acids did not. The operon was shown to be induced by formaldehyde, and the genes 
have been renamed frmR, frmA, and frmB, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6714-6720.2004 
PMCID: PMC522192
PMID: 15466022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19806-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Generating a Metal-responsive Transcriptional Regulator to Test What Confers
Metal Sensing in Cells.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Chakrabarti B(1), Foster AW(1),
Lurie-Luke E(3), Huggins TG(2), Robinson NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Centre, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040, and.
(3)Life Sciences Open Innovation, London Innovation Centre, Procter and Gamble
Technical Centres, Ltd., Egham TW20 9NW, United Kingdom.
(4)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (a CsoR/RcnR-like
transcriptional de-repressor) is shown to repress the frmRA operator-promoter,
and repression is alleviated by formaldehyde but not manganese, iron, cobalt,
nickel, copper, or Zn(II) within cells. In contrast, repression by a mutant
FrmRE64H (which gains an RcnR metal ligand) is alleviated by cobalt and Zn(II).
Unexpectedly, FrmR was found to already bind Co(II), Zn(II), and Cu(I), and
moreover metals, as well as formaldehyde, trigger an allosteric response that
weakens DNA affinity. However, the sensory metal sites of the cells' endogenous
metal sensors (RcnR, ZntR, Zur, and CueR) are all tighter than FrmR for their
cognate metals. Furthermore, the endogenous metal sensors are shown to
out-compete FrmR. The metal-sensing FrmRE64H mutant has tighter metal affinities 
than FrmR by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Gain of cobalt sensing by
FrmRE64H remains enigmatic because the cobalt affinity of FrmRE64H is
substantially weaker than that of the endogenous cobalt sensor. Cobalt sensing
requires glutathione, which may assist cobalt access, conferring a kinetic
advantage. For Zn(II), the metal affinity of FrmRE64H approaches the metal
affinities of cognate Zn(II) sensors. Counter-intuitively, the allosteric
coupling free energy for Zn(II) is smaller in metal-sensing FrmRE64H compared
with nonsensing FrmR. By determining the copies of FrmR and FrmRE64H tetramers
per cell, then estimating promoter occupancy as a function of intracellular
Zn(II) concentration, we show how a modest tightening of Zn(II) affinity, plus
weakened DNA affinity of the apoprotein, conspires to make the relative
properties of FrmRE64H (compared with ZntR and Zur) sufficient to sense Zn(II)
inside cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427 
PMCID: PMC4528141
PMID: 26109070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (acnA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Res. 2021 Jan;242:126629. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629. Epub 2020 
Oct 22.

Participation of two sRNA RyhB homologs from the fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri
in bacterial physiology.

Acuña LG(1), Barros MJ(2), Montt F(3), Peñaloza D(4), Núñez P(5), Valdés I(6),
Gil F(7), Fuentes JA(8), Calderón IL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lillian.gabriela@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: mbarrosgamonal@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: fernanda.monttc@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: diego.ignacio.mp@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: paulanunezrojas@gmail.com.
(6)Desarrollo de Biológicos, Veterquímica S.A., Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: ivaldes@veterquimica.cl.
(7)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: fernandogil@unab.cl.
(8)Laboratorio de Genética y Patogénesis Bacteriana, Departamento de Ciencias
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, 
Chile. Electronic address: jfuentes@unab.cl.
(9)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lcalderon@unab.cl.

Small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression and
physiology in bacteria. RyhB is an iron-responsive sRNA well characterized in
Escherichia coli and conserved in other Enterobacteriaceae. In this study, we
identified and characterized two RyhB homologs (named RyhB-1 and RyhB-2) in the
fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri. We found that, as in other Enterobacteriaceae,
both RyhB-1 and RyhB-2 are induced under iron starvation, repressed by the Fur
regulator, and depend on Hfq for stability. Despite these similarities in
expression, the mutant strains of Y. ruckeri lacking RyhB-1 (ΔryhB-1) or RyhB-2
(ΔryhB-2) exhibited differential phenotypes. In comparison with the wild type,
the ΔryhB-1 strain showed a hypermotile phenotype, reduced biofilm formation,
increased replication rate, faster growth, and increased ATP levels in bacterial 
cultures. By contrast, in salmon cell cultures, the ΔryhB-1 strain exhibited an
increased survival. On the other hand, the ΔryhB-2 strain was non-motile and
showed augmented biofilm formation as compared to the wild type. The expression
of a subset of RyhB conserved targets, selected from different bacterial species,
was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR in wild type, ΔryhB-1, ΔryhB-2, and ΔryhB-1
ΔryhB-2 strains cultured in iron-depleted media. RyhB-1 negatively affected the
expression of most analyzed genes (sodB, acnA, sdhC, bfr, fliF, among others),
whose functions are related to metabolism and motility, involving iron-containing
proteins. Among the genes analyzed, only sdhC and bfr appeared as targets for
RyhB-2. Taken together, these results indicate that Y. ruckeri RyhB homologs
participate in the modulation of the bacterial physiology with non-redundant
roles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629 
PMID: 33153884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiology (Reading). 2013 Jun;159(Pt 6):1209-1216. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.067934-0. Epub 2013 May 1.

Characterization of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium aconitase A.

Baothman OAS(1), Rolfe MD(1), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Aconitases (Acn) are iron-sulfur proteins that catalyse the reversible
isomerization of citrate and isocitrate via the intermediate cis-aconitate in the
Krebs cycle. Some Acn proteins are bi-functional and under conditions of iron
starvation and oxidative stress lose their iron-sulfur clusters and become
post-transcriptional regulators by binding specific mRNA targets. Many bacterial 
species possess two genetically distinct aconitase proteins, AcnA and AcnB.
Current understanding of the regulation and functions of AcnA and AcnB in dual
Acn bacteria is based on a model developed in Escherichia coli. Thus, AcnB is the
major Krebs cycle enzyme expressed during exponential growth, whereas AcnA is a
more stable, stationary phase and stress-induced enzyme, and both E. coli Acns
are bi-functional. Here a second dual Acn bacterium, Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium), has been analysed. Phenotypic traits of S.
Typhimurium acn mutants were consistent with AcnB acting as the major Acn
protein. Promoter fusion experiments indicated that acnB transcription was
~10-fold greater than that of acnA and that acnA expression was regulated by the 
cyclic-AMP receptor protein (CRP, glucose starvation), the fumarate nitrate
reduction regulator (FNR, oxygen starvation), the ferric uptake regulator (Fur,
iron starvation) and the superoxide response protein (SoxR, oxidative stress). In
contrast to E. coli, S. Typhimurium acnA was not induced in the stationary phase.
Furthermore, acnA expression was enhanced in an acnB mutant, presumably to
partially compensate for the lack of AcnB activity. Isolated S. Typhimurium AcnA 
protein had kinetic and mRNA-binding properties similar to those described for E.
coli AcnA. Thus, the work reported here provides a second example of the
regulation and function of AcnA and AcnB proteins in a dual Acn bacterium.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.067934-0 
PMID: 23637460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMC Microbiol. 2010 Oct 16;10:264. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-264.

The tricarboxylic acid cycle in Shewanella oneidensis is independent of Fur and
RyhB control.

Yang Y(1), McCue LA, Parsons AB, Feng S, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China. yangyf@tsinghua.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: It is well established in E. coli and Vibrio cholerae that strains
harboring mutations in the ferric uptake regulator gene (fur) are unable to
utilize tricarboxylic acid (TCA) compounds, due to the down-regulation of key TCA
cycle enzymes, such as AcnA and SdhABCD. This down-regulation is mediated by a
Fur-regulated small regulatory RNA named RyhB. It is unclear in the
γ-proteobacterium S. oneidensis whether TCA is also regulated by Fur and RyhB.
RESULTS: In the present study, we showed that a fur deletion mutant of S.
oneidensis could utilize TCA compounds. Consistently, expression of the TCA cycle
genes acnA and sdhA was not down-regulated in the mutant. To explore this
observation further, we identified a ryhB gene in Shewanella species and
experimentally demonstrated the gene expression. Further experiments suggested
that RyhB was up-regulated in fur mutant, but that AcnA and SdhA were not
controlled by RyhB.
CONCLUSIONS: These cumulative results delineate an important difference of the
Fur-RyhB regulatory cycle between S. oneidensis and other γ-proteobacteria. This 
work represents a step forward for understanding the unique regulation in S.
oneidensis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-264 
PMCID: PMC2964681
PMID: 20950482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6800-8.

The glutathione-glutaredoxin system in Rhodobacter capsulatus: part of a complex 
regulatory network controlling defense against oxidative stress.

Li K(1), Hein S, Zou W, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32,
35392 Giessen, Germany.

Mutants with defects in components of the glutathione-glutaredoxin (GSH/Grx)
system of Rhodobacter capsulatus were constructed to study its role in defense
against oxidative stress and the redox-dependent formation of photosynthetic
complexes. The lack of the glutaredoxin 3 gene (grxC) or the glutathione
synthetase B gene (gshB) resulted in lower growth rates under aerobic conditions 
and higher sensitivity to oxidative stress, confirming the role of the GSH/Grx
system in oxidative stress defense. Both mutants are highly sensitive to
disulfide stress, indicating a major contribution of the GSH/Grx system to the
thiol-disulfide redox buffer in the cytoplasm. Like mutations in the thioredoxin 
system, mutations in the GSH/Grx system affected the formation of photosynthetic 
complexes, which is redox dependent in R. capsulatus. Expression of the genes
grxC, gshB, grxA for glutaredoxin 1, and gorA for glutathione reductase, all
encoding components of the GSH/Grx system, was not induced by oxidative stress.
Other genes, for which a role in oxidative stress was established in Escherichia 
coli, acnA, fpr, fur, and katG, were strongly induced by oxidative stress in R.
capsulatus. Mutations in the grxC, and/or gshB, and/or trxC (thioredoxin 2) genes
affected expression of these genes, indicating an interplay of the different
defense systems against oxidative stress. The OxyR and the SoxRS regulons control
the expression of many genes involved in oxidative stress defense in E. coli in
response to H2O2 and superoxide, respectively. Our data and the available genome 
sequence of R. capsulatus suggest that a SoxRS system is lacking but an
alternative superoxide specific regulator exists in R. capsulatus. While the
expression of gorA and grxA is regulated by H2O2 in E. coli this is not the case 
in R. capsulatus, indicating that the OxyR regulons of these two species are
significantly different.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6800-6808.2004 
PMCID: PMC522184
PMID: 15466032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4620-5. Epub 2002 Mar 26.

A small RNA regulates the expression of genes involved in iron metabolism in
Escherichia coli.

Massé E(1), Gottesman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, Building 37, Room 
5132, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A small RNA, RyhB, was found as part of a genomewide search for novel small RNAs 
in Escherichia coli. The RyhB 90-nt RNA down-regulates a set of iron-storage and 
iron-using proteins when iron is limiting; it is itself negatively regulated by
the ferric uptake repressor protein, Fur (Ferric uptake regulator). RyhB RNA
levels are inversely correlated with mRNA levels for the sdhCDAB operon, encoding
succinate dehydrogenase, as well as five other genes previously shown to be
positively regulated by Fur by an unknown mechanism. These include two other
genes encoding enzymes in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, acnA and fumA, two
ferritin genes, ftnA and bfr, and a gene for superoxide dismutase, sodB. Fur
positive regulation of all these genes is fully reversed in an ryhB mutant. Our
results explain the previously observed inability of fur mutants to grow on
succinate. RyhB requires the RNA-binding protein, Hfq, for activity. Sequences
within RyhB are complementary to regions within each of the target genes,
suggesting that RyhB acts as an antisense RNA. In sdhCDAB, the complementary
region is at the end of the first gene of the sdhCDAB operon; full-length sdhCDAB
message disappears and a truncated message, equivalent in size to the region
upstream of the complementarity, is detected when RyhB is expressed. RyhB
provides a mechanism for the cell to down-regulate iron-storage proteins and
nonessential iron-containing proteins when iron is limiting, thus modulating
intracellular iron usage to supplement mechanisms for iron uptake directly
regulated by Fur.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.032066599 
PMCID: PMC123697
PMID: 11917098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Dec;143 ( Pt 12):3795-3805. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-12-3795.

Transcriptional regulation of the aconitase genes (acnA and acnB) of Escherichia 
coli.

Cunningham L(1), Gruer MJ(1), Guest JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Escherichia coli contains two differentially regulated aconitase genes, acnA and 
acnB. Two acnA promoters transcribing from start points located 407 bp (P1acnA)
and 50 bp (P2acnA) upstream of the acnA coding region, and one acnB promoter
(PacnB) with a start point 95 bp upstream of the acnB coding region, were
identified by primer extension analysis. A 2.8 kb acnA monocistronic transcript
was detected by Northern blot hybridization, but only in redox-stressed
(methyl-viologen-treated) cultures, and a 2.5 kb acnB monocistronic transcript
was detected in exponential- but not stationary-phase cultures. These findings
are consistent with previous observations that acnA is specifically subject to
SoxRS-mediated activation, whereas acnB encodes the major aconitase that is
synthesized earlier in the growth cycle than AcnA. Further studies with acn-lacZ 
gene fusions and a wider range of transcription regulators indicated that acnA
expression is initiated by sigma 38 from P1acnA, and from P2acnA it is activated 
directly or indirectly by CRP, FruR, Fur and SoxRS, and repressed by ArcA and
FNR. In contrast, acnB expression is activated by CRP and repressed by ArcA, FruR
and Fis from PacnB. Comparable studies with fum-lacZ fusions indicated that
transcription of fumC, but not of fumA or fumB, is initiated by RNA polymerase
containing sigma 38. It is concluded that AcnB is the major citric acid cycle
enzyme, whereas AcnA is an aerobic stationary-phase enzyme that is specifically
induced by iron and redox-stress.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-12-3795 
PMID: 9421904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 1994 Oct;140 ( Pt 10):2531-41.

Two genetically-distinct and differentially-regulated aconitases (AcnA and AcnB) 
in Escherichia coli.

Gruer MJ(1), Guest JR.

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK.

An acnA mutant of Escherichia coli was constructed by replacing the chromosomal
acnA gene by an internally deleted derivative containing a kanR cassette.
Southern and Western blotting confirmed that the acnA gene had been replaced by
the disrupted gene and that the aconitase A protein was no longer expressed.
However, the mutant failed to exhibit the anticipated glutamate auxotrophy and it
retained a residual aconitase activity. This activity was due to an analogous
unstable enzyme(s) designated aconitase B. Studies on the regulation of aconitase
A synthesis using an acnA-lacZ translational fusion showed that the acnA gene
resembles other citric acid cycle genes in being subject to CRP-mediated
catabolite repression and ArcA-mediated anaerobic repression. In addition to
being activated by the SoxRS oxidative stress regulatory system, the acnA gene
appeared to be activated by the ferric uptake regulator (Fur). It was concluded
that the acnA gene belongs to at least four global regulatory networks, crp,
arcA, fur and soxRS. In contrast, the aconitase B activity decreased after
exposure to oxidative stress and was less affected by anaerobiosis. Comparable
studies with the fumarase genes (fumA, B and C) indicated that fumA (encoding the
unstable aerobic iron-sulphur-containing fumarase) is activated by the ferric
uptake regulator (Fur) and fumC (encoding the stable fumarase) is activated by
the SoxRS oxidative stress regulatory system.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-140-10-2531 
PMID: 8000525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (carB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):317-28. doi:
10.1107/S1399004713027466. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Stealth carriers for low-resolution structure determination of membrane proteins 
in solution.

Maric S(1), Skar-Gislinge N(1), Midtgaard S(1), Thygesen MB(2), Schiller J(3),
Frielinghaus H(4), Moulin M(5), Haertlein M(5), Forsyth VT(5), Pomorski TG(6),
Arleth L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5,
2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)CARB Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen,
Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Institut für Medizinische Physik und Biophysik, Medizinische Fakultät,
Universität Leipzig, Härtelstrasse 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich Centre for Neutron Scattering, TUM
FRM-2, Lichtenbergstrasse 1, 85747 Garching, Germany.
(5)Life Sciences Group, Institut Laue-Langevin, 6 Rue Jules Horowitz, 38042
Grenoble, France.
(6)Center for Membrane Pumps in Cells and Disease, Department of Plant and
Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Thorvaldsensvej 40,
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

Structural studies of membrane proteins remain a great experimental challenge.
Functional reconstitution into artificial nanoscale bilayer disc carriers that
mimic the native bilayer environment allows the handling of membrane proteins in 
solution. This enables the use of small-angle scattering techniques for fast and 
reliable structural analysis. The difficulty with this approach is that the
carrier discs contribute to the measured scattering intensity in a highly
nontrivial fashion, making subsequent data analysis challenging. Here, an elegant
solution to circumvent the intrinsic complexity brought about by the presence of 
the carrier disc is presented. In combination with small-angle neutron scattering
(SANS) and the D2O/H2O-based solvent contrast-variation method, it is
demonstrated that it is possible to prepare specifically deuterated carriers that
become invisible to neutrons in 100% D2O at the length scales relevant to SANS.
These `stealth' carrier discs may be used as a general platform for
low-resolution structural studies of membrane proteins using well established
data-analysis tools originally developed for soluble proteins.

DOI: 10.1107/S1399004713027466 
PMID: 24531466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jul 2;454(1-2):1-6.

Efficient expression, purification and crystallisation of two hyperthermostable
enzymes of histidine biosynthesis.

Thoma R(1), Obmolova G, Lang DA, Schwander M, Jenö P, Sterner R, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Biophysikalische Chemie, Biozentrum der Universität Basel,
Switzerland.

Enzymes from hyperthermophiles can be efficiently purified after expression in
mesophilic hosts and are well-suited for crystallisation attempts. Two enzymes of
histidine biosynthesis from Thermotoga maritima,
N'-((5'-phosphoribosyl)-formimino)-5-aminoimidazol-4-carb oxamid ribonucleotide
isomerase and the cyclase moiety of imidazoleglycerol phosphate synthase, were
overexpressed in Escherichia coli, both in their native and
seleno-methionine-labelled forms, purified by heat precipitation of host proteins
and crystallised. N'-((5'-phosphoribosyl)-formimino)-5-aminoimidazol-4-carb
oxamid ribonucleotide isomerase crystallised in four different forms, all
suitable for X-ray structure solution, and the cyclase moiety of
imidazoleglycerol phosphate synthase yielded one crystal form that diffracted to 
atomic resolution. The obtained crystals will enable the determination of the
first three-dimensional structures of enzymes from the histidine biosynthetic
pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)00757-7 
PMID: 10413084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (csgD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2019 Nov 22;431(23):4775-4793. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.04.001. Epub
2019 Apr 4.

A c-di-GMP-Based Switch Controls Local Heterogeneity of Extracellular Matrix
Synthesis which Is Crucial for Integrity and Morphogenesis of Escherichia coli
Macrocolony Biofilms.

Serra DO(1), Hengge R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: regine.hengge@hu-berlin.de.

The extracellular matrix in macrocolony biofilms of Escherichia coli is arranged 
in a complex large-scale architecture, with homogenic matrix production close to 
the surface, whereas zones further below display pronounced local heterogeneity
of matrix production, which results in distinct three-dimensional architectural
structures. Combining genetics, cryosectioning and fluorescence microscopy of
macrocolony biofilms, we demonstrate here in situ that this local matrix
heterogeneity is generated by a c-di-GMP-dependent molecular switch characterized
by several nested positive and negative feedback loops. In this switch, the
trigger phosphodiesterase PdeR is the key component for establishing local
heterogeneity in the activation of the transcription factor MlrA, which in turn
activates expression of the major matrix regulator CsgD. Upon its release of
direct inhibition by PdeR, the second switch component, the diguanylate cyclase
DgcM, activates MlrA by direct interaction. Antagonistically acting PdeH and DgcE
provide for a PdeR-sensed c-di-GMP input into this switch and-via their spatially
differentially controlled expression-generate the long-range vertical asymmetry
of the matrix architecture. Using flow cytometry, we show heterogeneity of CsgD
expression to also occur in spatially unstructured planktonic cultures, where it 
is controlled by the same c-di-GMP circuitry as in macrocolony biofilms.
Quantification by flow cytometry also showed CsgDON subpopulations with distinct 
CsgD expression levels and revealed an additional fine-tuning feedback within the
PdeR/DgcM-mediated switch that depends on c-di-GMP synthesis by DgcM. Finally,
local heterogeneity of matrix production was found to be crucial for the
tissue-like elasticity that allows for large-scale wrinkling and folding of
macrocolony biofilms.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.04.001 
PMID: 30954572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jul;101(1):136-51. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13379. Epub 2016 May 6.

The green tea polyphenol EGCG inhibits E. coli biofilm formation by impairing
amyloid curli fibre assembly and downregulating the biofilm regulator CsgD via
the σ(E) -dependent sRNA RybB.

Serra DO(1), Mika F(1), Richter AM(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115,
Berlin, Germany.

In bacterial biofilms, which are often involved in chronic infections, cells are 
surrounded by a self-produced extracellular matrix that contains amyloid fibres, 
exopolysaccharides and other biopolymers. The matrix contributes to the
pronounced resistance of biofilms against antibiotics and host immune systems.
Being highly inflammatory, matrix amyloids such as curli fibres of Escherichia
coli can also play a role in pathogenicity. Using macrocolony biofilms of
commensal and pathogenic E. coli as a model system, we demonstrate here that the 
green tea polyphenol epigallocatachin gallate (EGCG) is a potent antibiofilm
agent. EGCG virtually eliminates the biofilm matrix by directly interfering with 
the assembly of curli subunits into amyloid fibres, and by triggering the σ(E)
cell envelope stress response and thereby reducing the expression of CsgD - a
crucial activator of curli and cellulose biosynthesis - due to csgD mRNA
targeting by the σ(E) -dependent sRNA RybB. These findings highlight EGCG as a
potential adjuvant for antibiotic therapy of biofilm-associated infections.
Moreover, EGCG may support therapies against pathogenic E. coli that produce
inflammatory curli fibres along with Shigatoxin.

© 2016 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13379 
PMID: 26992034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Environ Microbiol. 2015 Dec;17(12):5073-88. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12991. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

Vertical stratification of matrix production is essential for physical integrity 
and architecture of macrocolony biofilms of Escherichia coli.

Serra DO(1), Klauck G(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
10115, Germany.

Bacterial macrocolony biofilms grow into intricate three-dimensional structures
that depend on self-produced extracellular polymers conferring protection,
cohesion and elasticity to the biofilm. In Escherichia coli, synthesis of this
matrix - consisting of amyloid curli fibres and cellulose - requires CsgD, a
transcription factor regulated by the stationary phase sigma factor RpoS, and
occurs in the nutrient-deprived cells of the upper layer of macrocolonies. Is
this asymmetric matrix distribution functionally important or is it just a
fortuitous by-product of an unavoidable nutrient gradient? In order to address
this question, the RpoS-dependent csgD promoter was replaced by a vegetative
promoter. This re-wiring of csgD led to CsgD and matrix production in both strata
of macrocolonies, with the lower layer transforming into a rigid 'base plate' of 
growing yet curli-connected cells. As a result, the two strata broke apart
followed by desiccation and exfoliation of the top layer. By contrast,
matrix-free cells at the bottom of wild-type macrocolonies maintain colony
contact with the humid agar support by flexibly filling the space that opens up
under buckling areas of the macrocolony. Precisely regulated stratification in
matrix-free and matrix-producing cell layers is thus essential for the physical
integrity and architecture of E. coli macrocolony biofilms.

© 2015 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12991 
PMCID: PMC5014196
PMID: 26234179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. RNA Biol. 2014;11(5):494-507. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Small RNAs in the control of RpoS, CsgD, and biofilm architecture of Escherichia 
coli.

Mika F(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie; Humboldt Universität zu Berlin; Berlin,
Germany.

Amyloid curli fibers and cellulose are extracellular matrix components produced
in the stationary phase top layer of E. coli macrocolonies, which confer physical
protection, strong cohesion, elasticity, and wrinkled morphology to these
biofilms. Curli and cellulose synthesis is controlled by a three-level
transcription factor (TF) cascade with the RpoS sigma subunit of RNA polymerase
at the top, the MerR-like TF MlrA, and the biofilm regulator CsgD, with two
c-di-GMP control modules acting as key switching devices. Additional signal input
and fine-tuning is provided by an entire series of small RNAs-ArcZ, DsrA, RprA,
McaS, OmrA/OmrB, GcvB, and RydC--that differentially control all three TF modules
by direct mRNA interaction. This review not only summarizes the mechanisms of
action of these sRNAs, but also addresses the question of how these sRNAs and the
regulators they target contribute to building the intriguing three-dimensional
microarchitecture and macromorphology of these biofilms.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.28867 
PMCID: PMC4152358
PMID: 25028968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):2001-14. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.120. Epub 2013 May
24.

The EAL domain protein YciR acts as a trigger enzyme in a c-di-GMP signalling
cascade in E. coli biofilm control.

Lindenberg S(1), Klauck G, Pesavento C, Klauck E, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1972-4.

C-di-GMP-which is produced by diguanylate cyclases (DGC) and degraded by specific
phosphodiesterases (PDEs)-is a ubiquitous second messenger in bacterial biofilm
formation. In Escherichia coli, several DGCs (YegE, YdaM) and PDEs (YhjH, YciR)
and the MerR-like transcription factor MlrA regulate the transcription of csgD,
which encodes a biofilm regulator essential for producing amyloid curli fibres of
the biofilm matrix. Here, we demonstrate that this system operates as a
signalling cascade, in which c-di-GMP controlled by the DGC/PDE pair YegE/YhjH
(module I) regulates the activity of the YdaM/YciR pair (module II). Via multiple
direct interactions, the two module II proteins form a signalling complex with
MlrA. YciR acts as a connector between modules I and II and functions as a
trigger enzyme: its direct inhibition of the DGC YdaM is relieved when it binds
and degrades c-di-GMP generated by module I. As a consequence, YdaM then
generates c-di-GMP and-by direct and specific interaction-activates MlrA to
stimulate csgD transcription. Trigger enzymes may represent a general principle
in local c-di-GMP signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2013.120 
PMCID: PMC3715855
PMID: 23708798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. mBio. 2013 Mar 19;4(2):e00103-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00103-13.

Microanatomy at cellular resolution and spatial order of physiological
differentiation in a bacterial biofilm.

Serra DO(1), Richter AM, Klauck G, Mika F, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013 May;11(5):300.
    MBio. 2013;4(2):e00225-13.
    MBio. 2013;4(2):e00245-13.

Bacterial biofilms are highly structured multicellular communities whose
formation involves flagella and an extracellular matrix of adhesins, amyloid
fibers, and exopolysaccharides. Flagella are produced by still-dividing
rod-shaped Escherichia coli cells during postexponential growth when nutrients
become suboptimal. Upon entry into stationary phase, however, cells stop
producing flagella, become ovoid, and generate amyloid curli fibers. These
morphological changes, as well as accompanying global changes in gene expression 
and cellular physiology, depend on the induction of the stationary-phase sigma
subunit of RNA polymerase, σ(S) (RpoS), the nucleotide second messengers cyclic
AMP (cAMP), ppGpp, and cyclic-di-GMP, and a biofilm-controlling transcription
factor, CsgD. Using flagella, curli fibers, a CsgD::GFP reporter, and cell
morphology as "anatomical" hallmarks in fluorescence and scanning electron
microscopy, different physiological zones in macrocolony biofilms of E. coli K-12
can be distinguished at cellular resolution. Small ovoid cells encased in a
network of curli fibers form the outer biofilm layer. Inner regions are
characterized by heterogeneous CsgD::GFP and curli expression. The bottom zone of
the macrocolonies features elongated dividing cells and a tight mesh of entangled
flagella, the formation of which requires flagellar motor function. Also, the
cells in the outer-rim growth zone produce flagella, which wrap around and tether
cells together. Adjacent to this growth zone, small chains and patches of shorter
curli-surrounded cells appear side by side with flagellated curli-free cells
before curli coverage finally becomes confluent, with essentially all cells in
the surface layer being encased in "curli baskets."IMPORTANCE: Heterogeneity or
cellular differentiation in biofilms is a commonly accepted concept, but direct
evidence at the microscale has been difficult to obtain. Our study reveals the
microanatomy and microphysiology of an Escherichia coli macrocolony biofilm at an
unprecedented cellular resolution, with physiologically different zones and
strata forming as a function of known global regulatory networks that respond to 
biofilm-intrinsic gradients of nutrient supply. In addition, this study
identifies zones of heterogeneous and potentially bistable CsgD and curli
expression, shows bacterial curli networks to strikingly resemble Alzheimer
plaques, and suggests a new role of flagella as an architectural element in
biofilms.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00103-13 
PMCID: PMC3604763
PMID: 23512962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Feb 26;14(3):4560-79. doi: 10.3390/ijms14034560.

Small Regulatory RNAs in the Control of Motility and Biofilm Formation in E. coli
and Salmonella.

Mika F(1), Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 14195,
Germany. franziska.mika@fu-berlin.de.

Biofilm formation in Escherichia coli and other enteric bacteria involves the
inverse regulation of the synthesis of flagella and biofilm matrix components
such as amyloid curli fibres, cellulose, colanic acid and
poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PGA). Physiologically, these processes reflect the
transition from growth to stationary phase. At the molecular level, they are
tightly controlled by various sigma factors competing for RNA polymerase, a
series of transcription factors acting in hierarchical regulatory cascades and
several nucleotide messengers, including cyclic-di-GMP. In addition, a
surprisingly large number of small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) have been shown to
directly or indirectly modulate motility and/or biofilm formation. This review
aims at giving an overview of these sRNA regulators and their impact in biofilm
formation in E. coli and Salmonella. Special emphasis will be put on sRNAs, that 
have known targets such as the mRNAs of the flagellar master regulator FlhDC, the
stationary phase sigma factor σS (RpoS) and the key biofilm regulator CsgD that
have recently been shown to act as major hubs for regulation by multiple sRNAs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms14034560 
PMCID: PMC3634460
PMID: 23443158 


8. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Sep;85(5):893-906. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08147.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Molecular function and potential evolution of the biofilm-modulating blue
light-signalling pathway of Escherichia coli.

Tschowri N(1), Lindenberg S, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

Escherichia coli senses blue light via the BLUF-EAL protein BluF (YcgF). The
degenerate EAL domain of BluF does not have cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase
activity, but BluF directly antagonizes the MerR-like repressor BluR (YcgE),
which leads to expression of the ycgZ-ymgABC operon and activation of the Rcs
system (Tschowri et al., 2009; Genes Dev 23: 522-534). While bluR, bluF and ycgZ 
have individual transcriptional start sites, comparative genome analysis
indicates that the bluR-bluF-ycgZ-ymgAB region represents a functional unit in
various enteric bacteria that is characterized by bluF alleles encoding
degenerate EAL domains. Re-introducing conserved amino acids involved in
phosphodiesterase activity of EAL domains did not restore enzymatic activity or
c-di-GMP binding of BluF, but weakened its ability to antagonize BluR and
improved a residual interaction with the BluR paralogue MlrA, which controls
expression of the biofilm regulator CsgD and curli fibres. We identified the BluR
binding site in the ycgZ promoter and observed that BluR also has residual
affinity for the MlrA-dependent csgD promoter. Altogether, we propose that BluF
evolved from a blue light-regulated PDE into a specific antagonist of a duplicate
of MlrA that became BluR, which controls not only curli but various biofilm
functions via the Ymg/Rcs pathway.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08147.x 
PMCID: PMC3509220
PMID: 22783906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Apr;84(1):51-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08002.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 22.

Targeting of csgD by the small regulatory RNA RprA links stationary phase,
biofilm formation and cell envelope stress in Escherichia coli.

Mika F(1), Busse S, Possling A, Berkholz J, Tschowri N, Sommerfeldt N, Pruteanu
M, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

RprA is a small regulatory RNA known to weakly affect the translation of σ(S)
(RpoS) in Escherichia coli. Here we demonstrate that csgD, which encodes a
stationary phase-induced biofilm regulator, as well as ydaM, which encodes a
diguanylate cyclase involved in activating csgD transcription, are novel
negatively controlled RprA targets. As shown by extensive mutational analysis,
direct binding of RprA to the 5'-untranslated and translational initiation
regions of csgD mRNA inhibits translation and reduces csgD mRNA levels. In the
case of ydaM mRNA, RprA base-pairs directly downstream of the translational start
codon. In a feedforward loop, RprA can thus downregulate > 30 YdaM/CsgD-activated
genes including those for adhesive curli fimbriae. However, during early
stationary phase, when csgD transcription is strongly activated, the synthesis of
csgD mRNA exceeds that of RprA, which allows the accumulation of CsgD protein.
This situation is reversed when csgD transcription is shut off - for instance,
later in stationary phase or during biofilm formation - or by conditions that
further activate RprA expression via the Rcs two-component system. Thus,
antagonistic regulation of csgD and RprA at the mRNA level integrates cell
envelope stress signals with global gene expression during stationary phase and
biofilm formation.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08002.x 
PMCID: PMC3465796
PMID: 22356413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Microbiology (Reading). 2009 Apr;155(Pt 4):1318-1331. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.024257-0.

Gene expression patterns and differential input into curli fimbriae regulation of
all GGDEF/EAL domain proteins in Escherichia coli.

Sommerfeldt N(1), Possling A(1), Becker G(1), Pesavento C(1), Tschowri N(1),
Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

Switching from the motile planktonic bacterial lifestyle to a biofilm existence
is stimulated by the signalling molecule bis-(3'-5')-cyclic-diguanosine
monophosphate (cyclic-di-GMP), which is antagonistically controlled by
diguanylate cyclases (DGCs; characterized by GGDEF domains) and specific
phosphodiesterases (PDEs; mostly featuring EAL domains). Here, we present the
expression patterns of all 28 genes that encode GGDEF/EAL domain proteins in
Escherichia coli K-12. Twenty-one genes are expressed in Luria-Bertani medium,
with 15 being under sigma(S) control. While a small subset of GGDEF/EAL proteins 
(YeaJ and YhjH) is dominant and modulates motility in post-exponentially growing 
cells, a diverse battery of GGDEF/EAL proteins is deployed during entry into
stationary phase, especially in cells grown at reduced temperature (28 degrees
C). This suggests that multiple signal input into cyclic-di-GMP control is
particularly important in growth-restricted cells in an extra-host environment.
Six GGDEF/EAL genes differentially control the expression of adhesive curli
fimbriae. Besides the previously described ydaM, yciR, yegE and yhjH genes, these
are yhdA (csrD), which stimulates the expression of the DGC YdaM and the major
curli regulator CsgD, and yeaP, which contributes to expression of the curli
structural operon csgBAC. Finally, we discuss why other GGDEF/EAL domain-encoding
genes, despite being expressed, do not influence motility and/or curli formation.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.024257-0 
PMID: 19332833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (degQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. EMBO J. 2018 Apr 13;37(8). pii: e97825. doi: 10.15252/embj.201797825. Epub 2018
Mar 7.

Transmembrane redox control and proteolysis of PdeC, a novel type of c-di-GMP
phosphodiesterase.

Herbst S(1), Lorkowski M(1), Sarenko O(1), Nguyen TKL(1), Jaenicke T(1), Hengge
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany regine.hengge@hu-berlin.de.

The nucleotide second messenger c-di-GMP nearly ubiquitously promotes bacterial
biofilm formation, with enzymes that synthesize and degrade c-di-GMP being
controlled by diverse N-terminal sensor domains. Here, we describe a novel class 
of widely occurring c-di-GMP phosphodiesterases (PDE) that feature a periplasmic 
"CSS domain" with two highly conserved cysteines that is flanked by two
transmembrane regions (TM1 and TM2) and followed by a cytoplasmic EAL domain with
PDE activity. Using PdeC, one of the five CSS domain PDEs of Escherichia coli
K-12, we show that DsbA/DsbB-promoted disulfide bond formation in the CSS domain 
reduces PDE activity. By contrast, the free thiol form is enzymatically highly
active, with the TM2 region promoting dimerization. Moreover, this form is
processed by periplasmic proteases DegP and DegQ, yielding a highly active
TM2 + EAL fragment that is slowly removed by further proteolysis. Similar redox
control and proteolysis was also observed for a second CSS domain PDE, PdeB. At
the physiological level, CSS domain PDEs modulate production and supracellular
architecture of extracellular matrix polymers in the deeper layers of mature
E. coli biofilms.

© 2018 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201797825 
PMCID: PMC5897775
PMID: 29514851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Vaccine. 2009 Jun 19;27(30):4047-55. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.04.023. Epub
2009 Apr 25.

Construction of an attenuated Pseudomonas fluorescens strain and evaluation of
its potential as a cross-protective vaccine.

Wang HR(1), Hu YH, Zhang WW, Sun L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR
China.

Ferric uptake regulator (Fur) is a global transcription regulator that is
ubiquitous to Gram-negative bacteria and regulates diverse biological processes, 
including iron uptake, cellular metabolism, stress response, and production of
virulence determinants. As a result, for many pathogenic bacteria, Fur plays a
crucial role in the course of infection and disease development. In this study,
the fur gene was cloned from a pathogenic Pseudomonas fluorescens strain, TSS,
isolated from diseased Japanese flounder cultured in a local farm. TSS Fur can
partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A
TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS, TFM exhibits reduced 
growth ability, aberrant production of outer membrane proteins, decreased
resistance against host serum bactericidal activity, impaired ability to
disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall
bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a live
vaccine administered via the injection, immersion, and oral routes, TFM affords
high levels of protection upon Japanese flounder against not only P. fluorescens 
infection but also Aeromonas hydrophila infection. Furthermore, a plasmid, pJAQ, 
was constructed, which expresses the coding element of the Vibrio harveyi antigen
AgaV-DegQ. TFM harboring pJAQ can secret AgaV-DegQ into the extracellular milieu.
Vaccination of Japanese flounder with live TFM/pJAQ elicited strong
immunoprotection against both V. harveyi and A. hydrophila infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.04.023 
PMID: 19501788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Aug;143 ( Pt 8):2769-2774. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-8-2769.

Analysis of the Bacillus subtilis genome: cloning and nucleotide sequence of a 62
kb region between 275 degrees (rrnB) and 284 degrees (pai).

Oudega B(1), Koningstein G(1), Rodrigues L(1), de Sales Ramon M(1), Hilbert H(2),
Düsterhöft A(2), Pohl TM(3), Weitzenegger T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Institute of Molecular Biological
Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, Faculty of Biology, Vrije Universiteit, De
Boelelaan 1087, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Qiagen GmbH, Max-Volmer Strasse 4, D-40724 Hilden, Germany.
(3)Gesellschaft für Analyse-Technik und Consulting GmbH, Fritz-Arnold Strasse 23,
D-78467 Konstanz, Germany.

In the framework of the international project aimed at the sequencing of the
Bacillus subtilis genome, five DNA fragments in the region between rrnB (275
degrees) and pai (284 degrees) were cloned by inverse and combinatorial
long-range PCR and their nucleotide sequences were determined and analysed.
Together these sequences constituted a contig of 62229 bp. On the basis of the
position of Not1 and Stil restriction sites, the orientation and order of known
genetic markers was determined to be pai (284 degrees)-degQ comQ comP comAA
comAB-pbpD-kapB kinB patB-mcpB tipA mcpA tipB-rrnB (275 degrees). Fifty-four ORFs
were detected. Thirteen of these coincided with known B. subtilis genes, and 41
new ORFs were found. Of the predicted new gene products, 12 showed no significant
similarity to other known proteins, whereas ten showed strong similarity to
proteins of other organisms with unknown function. Nineteen predicted proteins
showed strong similarity to known proteins of other organisms, for instance a
Na+/H+ antiporter system of Bacillus alcalophilus, a sugar transport system found
in Mycoplasma genitalium, NADH-dependent butanol dehydrogenase of Clostridium
acetobutylicum, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase A of B, subtilis,
exo-1,4-alpha-glucosidase activity of Bacillus stearothermophilus and L-rhamnose 
isomerase of Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-8-2769 
PMID: 9274030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (efeB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2007 Aug;65(4):857-75. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

EfeUOB (YcdNOB) is a tripartite, acid-induced and CpxAR-regulated, low-pH Fe2+
transporter that is cryptic in Escherichia coli K-12 but functional in E. coli
O157:H7.

Cao J(1), Woodhall MR, Alvarez J, Cartron ML, Andrews SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading,
RG6 6AJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Mol Microbiol. 2007 Nov;66(3):827.

Escherichia coli possesses iron transporters specific for either Fe2+ or Fe3+.
Although Fe2+ is far more soluble than Fe3+, it rapidly oxidizes aerobically at
pH > or = 7. Thus, FeoAB, the major Fe2+ transporter of E. coli, operates
anaerobically. However, Fe2+ remains stable aerobically under acidic conditions, 
although a low-pH Fe2+ importer has not been previously identified. Here we show 
that ycdNOB (efeUOB) specifies the first such transporter. efeUOB is repressed at
high pH by CpxAR, and is Fe2+-Fur repressed. EfeU is homologous to the
high-affinity iron permease, Ftr1p, of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi. 
EfeO is periplasmic with a cupredoxin N-terminal domain; EfeB is also periplasmic
and is haem peroxidase-like. All three Efe proteins are required for Efe
function. The efeU gene of E. coli K-12 is cryptic due to a frameshift mutation -
repair of the single-base-pair deletion generates a functional EfeUOB system. In 
contrast, the efeUOB operon of the enterohaemorrhagic strain, O157:H7, lacks any 
frameshift and is functional. A 'wild-type' K-12 strain bearing a functional
EfeUOB displays a major growth advantage under aerobic, low-pH, low-iron
conditions when a competing metal is provided. 55Fe transport assays confirm the 
ferrous iron specificity of EfeUOB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05802.x 
PMID: 17627767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (folK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Planta Med. 1997 Dec;63(6):508-10.

Antibacterial activity of extracts and constituents of Pelargonium sidoides and
Pelargonium reniforme.

Kayser O(1), Kolodziej H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazie II, Pharmazeutische Biologie, Freie Universität Berlin,
Germany.

The antibacterial activity of extracts and isolated constituents (scopoletin,
umckalin, 5,6,7-trimethoxycoumarin, 6,8-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxycoumarin,
(+)-catechin, gallic acid and its methyl ester) of Pelargonium sidoides and
Pelargonium reniforme (Geraniaceae), plant species used in folk medicine by the
Southern African native population, was evaluated against 8 microorganisms,
including 3 Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and
beta-hemolytic Streptococcus 1451) and 5 Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Haemophilus influenzae). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) varied with the
preparation of the extracts and microorganisms tested, from about 0.6 mg/ml for
aqueous phases to over 10 mg/ml for crude Pelargonium extracts. With the
exception of the ineffective (+)-catechin, all the potentially active compounds
exhibited antibacterial activities with MICs of 200-1000 micrograms/ml. The
results provide for a rational basis of the traditional use of the titled
Pelargonium species.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-957752 
PMID: 9434601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (mioC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2000 May;36(3):557-69.

Analysis of the DNA-binding domain of Escherichia coli DnaA protein.

Blaesing F(1), Weigel C, Welzeck M, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195
Berlin-Dahlem, Germany.

The DNA-binding domain of the Escherichia coli DnaA protein is represented by the
94 C-terminal amino acids (domain 4, aa 374-467). The isolated DNA-binding domain
acts as a functional repressor in vivo, as monitored with a mioC:lacZ
translational fusion integrated into the chromosome of the indicator strain. In
order to identify residues required for specific DNA binding, site-directed and
random PCR mutagenesis were performed, using the mioC:lacZ construct for
selection. Mutations defective in DNA binding were found all over the DNA-binding
domain with some clustering in the basic loop region, within presumptive helix B 
and in a highly conserved region at the N-terminus of presumptive helix C.
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis revealed different binding classes of
mutant proteins. No or severely reduced binding activity was demonstrated for
amino acid substitutions at positions R399, R407, Q408, H434, T435, T436 and
A440. Altered binding specificity was found for mutations in a 12 residue region 
close to the N-terminus of helix C. The defects of the classical temperature
sensitive mutants dnaA204, dnaA205 and dnaA211 result from instability of the
proteins at higher temperatures. dnaX suppressors dnaA71 and dnaA721 map to the
region close to helix C and bind DNA non-specifically.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01881.x 
PMID: 10844646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 1988 Dec 20;73(2):347-54.

Termination of the Escherichia coli asnC transcript. The DnaA protein/dnaA box
complex blocks transcribing RNA polymerase.

Schaefer C(1), Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, F.R.G.

Genes clockwise of oriC, the Escherichia coli replication origin
(oriC-mioC-asnC), show anticlockwise transcription. The intergenic region between
mioC and asnC contains both a terminator and a consensus DnaA-protein-binding
site (dnaA box). We analysed termination in this region using galK expression to 
monitor for transcription. About 50% of the asnC transcripts were not terminated,
and about 25% terminated at the asnC terminator. We found that the DnaA
protein/dnaA box complex acts as a terminator of transcription for about 25% of
the transcripts. Its efficiency could be increased by raising the level of DnaA
protein, or it could be inactivated by deletion in the dnaA box or by thermal
denaturation of the DnaA protein.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90499-4 
PMID: 2854096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Nov;214(3):474-81.

Transcription in the region of the replication origin, oriC, of Escherichia coli:
termination of asnC transcripts.

Gielow A(1), Kücherer C, Kölling R, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Federal Republic of
Germany.

Transcription from the asnC promoter was found to proceed through the replication
origin, oriC, into the gidA gene of Escherichia coli. Between 10% and 20% of asnC
transcripts reached oriC in vivo. Termination sites in the intergenic region
between asnC and mioC and within mioC were determined in vivo and in vitro using 
S1 mapping. Only about 10% of the transcripts terminated at the asnC terminator
in vivo. DnaA protein dependent termination was observed close to the binding
site, dnaA box, for DnaA protein. In the in vitro replication system asnC
transcripts did not reach oriC, suggesting that asnC transcripts are not involved
in the initiation of replication, contrary to mioC transcripts. We suggest that
oriC and mioC might have been transposed during evolution into an asnC
regulation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00330483 
PMID: 2464126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Apr;212(1):99-104.

AsnC, a multifunctional regulator of genes located around the replication origin 
of Escherichia coli, oriC.

Kölling R(1), Gielow A, Seufert W, Kücherer C, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik, Berlin.

The expression of the gidA gene which is located immediately counterclockwise of 
the replication origin of Escherichia coli, oriC, was found to be negatively
regulated by the AsnC protein in an in vitro transcription-translation system.
This effect is not due to simple repression of transcription originating at the
gidA promoter, because the AsnC protein did not change the level of gidA promoter
dependent transcription as analysed by promoter-galK fusions and by S1 mapping.
From these data we conclude that the AsnC protein controls gidA gene expression
at a post-transcriptional level. gidA is the third gene in the oriC region,
besides asnA and asnC, whose expression is under AsnC control. However, the
mechanisms involved are different: regulation of transcription in the case of
asnA and asnC and post-transcriptional control of gidA. The gidA promoter was
mapped by deletion analysis and by S1 mapping. We defined two regions that affect
promoter activity negatively. Additional transcripts, regulated by AsnC, started 
more than 300 bp upstream of the gidA promoter and were found to enter the gidA
region. These transcripts, originating either at the mioC and/or the ansC
promoter traverse the replication origin.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00322450 
PMID: 2836709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 1988 Feb 25;263(6):2719-23.

Functionality of the dnaA protein binding site in DNA replication is
orientation-dependent.

Seufert W(1), Dobrinski B, Lurz R, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, West Germany.

We analyzed the functionality of different dnaA protein binding sites by assaying
in vitro dnaA-dependent replication of pBR322 derivatives. Single dnaA sites from
oriC and from the mioC and dnaA gene promoters were active when combined with the
primer generating element of pBR322 in a proper distance. Prereplisome assembly
did not require sequences in addition to the 9-base pair consensus dnaA binding
site. Inversion of the structurally asymmetric dnaA site relative to its
orientation in wild type pBR322 resulted in a marked reduction in replication
efficiency, as observed with five different dnaA sites studied. The direction of 
DNA replication was not affected.


PMID: 2830261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (modA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Gene Expr. 1999;8(3):187-96.

Overexpression, purification, and partial characterization of
ADP-ribosyltransferases modA and modB of bacteriophage T4.

Tiemann B(1), Depping R, Rüger W.

Author information: 
(1)Arbeitsgruppe Molekulare Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Ruhr-Universität
Bochum, Germany.

There is increasing experimental evidence that ADP-ribosylation of host proteins 
is an important means to regulate gene expression of bacteriophage T4.
Surprisingly, this phage codes for three different ADP-ribosyltransferases, gene 
products Alt, ModA, and ModB, modifying partially overlapping sets of host
proteins. While gene product Alt already has been isolated as a recombinant
protein and its action on host RNA polymerases and transcription regulation have 
been studied, the nucleotide sequences of the two mod genes was published only
recently. Their mode of action in the course of the infection cycle and the
consequences of the ADP-ribosylations catalyzed by these enzymes remain to be
investigated. Here we describe the cloning of the genes, the overexpression,
purification, and partial characterization of ADP-ribosyltransferases ModA and
ModB. Both proteins seem to act independently, and the ADP-ribosyl moieties are
transferred to different sets of host proteins. While gene product ModA,
similarly to the Alt protein, acts also on the alpha-subunit of host RNA
polymerase, the ModB activity serves another set of proteins, one of which was
identified as the S1 protein associated with the 30S subunit of the E. coli
ribosomes.


PMCID: PMC6157369
PMID: 10634320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1999 Oct;181(19):5930-9.

Activity of the molybdopterin-containing xanthine dehydrogenase of Rhodobacter
capsulatus can be restored by high molybdenum concentrations in a moeA mutant
defective in molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis.

Leimkühler S(1), Angermüller S, Schwarz G, Mendel RR, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Fakultät für Biologie, Lehrstuhl für Biologie der
Mikroorganismen, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

During the screening for Rhodobacter capsulatus mutants defective in xanthine
degradation, one Tn5 mutant which was able to grow with xanthine as a sole
nitrogen source only in the presence of high molybdate concentrations (1 mM), a
phenotype resembling Escherichia coli mogA mutants, was identified. Unexpectedly,
the corresponding Tn5 insertion was located within the moeA gene. Partial DNA
sequence analysis and interposon mutagenesis of regions flanking R. capsulatus
moeA revealed that no further genes essential for molybdopterin biosynthesis are 
located in the vicinity of moeA and revealed that moeA forms a monocistronic
transcriptional unit in R. capsulatus. Amino acid sequence alignments of R.
capsulatus MoeA (414 amino acids [aa]) with E. coli MogA (195 aa) showed that
MoeA contains an internal domain homologous to MogA, suggesting similar functions
of these proteins in the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor. Interposon
mutants defective in moeA did not exhibit dimethyl sulfoxide reductase or nitrate
reductase activity, which both require the molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide
(MGD) cofactor, even after addition of 1 mM molybdate to the medium. In contrast,
the activity of xanthine dehydrogenase, which binds the molybdopterin (MPT)
cofactor, was restored to wild-type levels after the addition of 1 mM molybdate
to the growth medium. Analysis of fluorescent derivatives of the molybdenum
cofactor of purified xanthine dehydrogenase isolated from moeA and modA mutant
strains, respectively, revealed that MPT is inserted into the enzyme only after
molybdenum chelation, and both metal chelation and Mo-MPT insertion can occur
only under high molybdate concentrations in the absence of MoeA. These data
support a model for the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor in which the
biosynthesis of MPT and MGD are split at a stage when the molybdenum atom is
added to MPT.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.19.5930-5939.1999 
PMCID: PMC103619
PMID: 10498704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;250(2):524-31.

Molybdate-uptake genes and molybdopterin-biosynthesis genes on a bacterial
plasmid--characterization of MoeA as a filament-forming protein with
adenosinetriphosphatase activity.

Menéndez C(1), Otto A, Igloi G, Nick P, Brandsch R, Schubach B, Böttcher B,
Brandsch R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

A gene cluster consisting of homologs to Escherichia coli moaA, moeA, moaC and
moaE, which encode enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of molybdopterin cofactor
(MoCo), and to modA, modB and modC, which encode a high-affinity molybdate
transporter, were identified on pAO1 of Arthrobacter nicotinovorans near genes of
molybdopterin-dependent enzymes involved in nicotine degradation. This gene
arrangement suggests a coordinated expression of the MoCo-dependent and the
MoCo-biosynthesis genes and shows that catabolic plasmids may carry the transport
and biosynthetic machinery for the synthesis of the cofactors needed for the
functioning of the enzymes they encode. pAO1 MoeA functionally complemented E.
coli moeA mutants. The overexpressed and purified protein, of molecular mass
44,500 Da, associated into high-molecular-mass complexes and spontaneously formed
gels at concentrations above 1 mg/ml. Transmission electron microscopy and atomic
force microscopy revealed that MoeA forms fibrilar structures. In the presence of
Mg2+ MoeA exhibited ATPase activity (0.020 pmol ATP x pmol protein(-1) x
min(-1)). ATP, ADP or AMP induced the disassembly of the MoeA fibers into
aggregates. pAO1 MoeA shows 39% identity to the C-terminal domain of the rat
neuroprotein gephyrin. Like gephyrin it binds to neurotubulin, but binds with
preference to tubulin dimers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.0524a.x 
PMID: 9428706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiol Res. 1995 Nov;150(4):347-61.

Molecular analysis of the molybdate uptake operon, modABCD, of Escherichia coli
and modR, a regulatory gene.

Walkenhorst HM(1), Hemschemeier SK, Eichenlaub R.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl Gentechnologie/Mikrobiologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität
Bielefeld, Germany.

The nucleotide sequence of a 6.8-kb chromosomal subfragment of plasmid pHW100
complementing an Escherichia coli modC (chlD) mutant has been determined. This
DNA region encodes the genes of a high-affinity uptake system for molybdate
arranged in an operon with the genes modABCD. Since the modA product has a signal
peptide at the N-terminus it probably is the periplasmic binding-protein for
molybdate. The products of modB (chlJ) and modC (chlD) have been described
earlier as the inner membrane protein and the ATP-binding protein of the
molybdate transport system, respectively. At present, there is no information on 
possible functions of the fourth gene of the operon, modD. Upstream of the mod
operon, two other gene loci, termed modR and an open reading frame ORF6 could be 
identified. ModR shares homology with a molybdenum-pterin binding protein of
Clostridium pasteurianum. ORF6 has extensive homology to ModC and other
nucleotide-binding proteins of E. coli. Insertional inactivation of modR and ORF6
using a gentamicin resistance gene cartridge has no effect on molybdoenzyme
activities, indicating that none of the two gene products is essential for
molybdate uptake or molybdenum cofactor synthesis. However, by using a plasmid
carrying a modA-lacZ gene fusion we observed that inactivation of modR releases
repression of the mod operon independent of the molybdate concentration in the
medium. This indicates that modR is a component of the mod operon regulation or
the repressor itself.

DOI: 10.1016/S0944-5013(11)80016-9 
PMID: 8564363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 1993 May;175(10):3031-42.

Characterization of Rhodobacter capsulatus genes encoding a molybdenum transport 
system and putative molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins.

Wang G(1), Angermüller S, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

The alternative, heterometal-free nitrogenase of Rhodobacter capsulatus is
repressed by traces of molybdenum in the medium. Strains carrying mutations
located downstream of nifB copy II were able to express the alternative
nitrogenase even in the presence of high molybdate concentrations. DNA sequence
analysis of a 5.5-kb fragment of this region revealed six open reading frames,
designated modABCD, mopA, and mopB. The gene products of modB and modC are
homologous to ChlJ and ChlD of Escherichia coli and represent an integral
membrane protein and an ATP-binding protein typical of high-affinity transport
systems, respectively. ModA and ModD exhibited no homology to known proteins, but
a leader peptide characteristic of proteins cleaved during export to the
periplasm is present in ModA, indicating that ModA might be a periplasmic
molybdate-binding protein. The MopA and MopB proteins showed a high degree of
amino acid sequence homology to each other. Both proteins contained a tandem
repeat of a domain encompassing 70 amino acid residues, which had significant
sequence similarity to low-molecular-weight molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins
from Clostridium pasteurianum. Compared with that for the parental nifHDK
deletion strain, the molybdenum concentrations necessary to repress the
alternative nitrogenase were increased 4-fold in a modD mutant and 500-fold in
modA, modB, and modC mutants. No significant inhibition of the heterometal-free
nitrogenase by molybdate was observed for mopA mopB double mutants. The uptake of
molybdenum by mod and mop mutants was estimated by measuring the activity of the 
conventional molybdenum-containing nitrogenase. Molybdenum transport was not
affected in a mopA mopB double mutant, whereas strains carrying lesions in the
binding-protein-dependent transport system were impaired in molybdenum uptake.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.10.3031-3042.1993 
PMCID: PMC204623
PMID: 8491722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (nirB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 1992 Nov;6(22):3395-404.

The Rhizobium leguminosarum FnrN protein is functionally similar to Escherichia
coli Fnr and promotes heterologous oxygen-dependent activation of transcription.

Schlüter A(1), Patschkowski T, Unden G, Priefer UB.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

An open reading frame from Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae strain VF39,
previously identified and found to be similar to Escherichia coli fnr and
Rhizobium meliloti fixK (orf240, thereafter called fnrN), was further analysed.
Analysis of the expression of an fnrN-lacZ transcriptional fusion revealed that
fnrN is preferentially expressed under oxygen limitation. Using R. meliloti
fixN-lacZ fusions it was shown that the fnrN gene product only mediates
transcriptional activation under microaerobiosis, indicating that the FnrN
protein responds, directly or indirectly, to oxygen. Plasmids which expressed
fnrN under the control of an E. coli promoter were able to complement an E. coli 
fnr mutant with respect to anaerobic growth on nitrate but not fumarate, and to
promote anaerobic but not aerobic activation of the Fnr-dependent E. coli genes
narGHJI, nirB and fdnGHI coding for nitrate reductase, NADH-dependent nitrite
reductase and formate dehydrogenase-N, respectively. Fumarate and DMSO reductase 
activities were not induced by FnrN. The E. coli fnr gene substituted for fnrN in
oxygen-regulated transcription of nirB- and fixN-lacZ fusions in R.
leguminosarum. The results indicate that Fnr and FnrN are functionally very
similar and share a common mode of oxygen-dependent transcriptional activation.
From hybridization studies, it appeared that fnrN-like genes are present in a
number of different R. leguminosarum strains.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1992.tb02207.x 
PMID: 1484491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (pal)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Oct;31(10):2793-804. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu223. Epub 2014
Jul 24.

Perturbation of iron homeostasis promotes the evolution of antibiotic resistance.

Méhi O(1), Bogos B(1), Csörgő B(1), Pál F(1), Nyerges A(1), Papp B(1), Pál C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary
pal.csaba@brc.mta.hu.

Evolution of antibiotic resistance in microbes is frequently achieved by
acquisition of spontaneous mutations during antimicrobial therapy. Here, we
demonstrate that inactivation of a central transcriptional regulator of iron
homeostasis (Fur) facilitates laboratory evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance in
Escherichia coli. To decipher the underlying molecular mechanisms, we first
performed a global transcriptome analysis and demonstrated that the set of genes 
regulated by Fur changes substantially in response to antibiotic treatment. We
hypothesized that the impact of Fur on evolvability under antibiotic pressure is 
due to the elevated intracellular concentration of free iron and the consequent
enhancement of oxidative damage-induced mutagenesis. In agreement with
expectations, overexpression of iron storage proteins, inhibition of iron
transport, or anaerobic conditions drastically suppressed the evolution of
resistance, whereas inhibition of the SOS response-mediated mutagenesis had only 
a minor effect. Finally, we provide evidence that a cell permeable iron chelator 
inhibits the evolution of resistance. In sum, our work revealed the central role 
of iron metabolism in the de novo evolution of antibiotic resistance, a pattern
that could influence the development of novel antimicrobial strategies.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu223 
PMCID: PMC4166929
PMID: 25063442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Plant Physiol. 2011 Jun 15;168(9):944-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2010.11.021.
Epub 2011 Feb 18.

4-Coumarate:CoA ligase family members from elicitor-treated Sorbus aucuparia cell
cultures.

Gaid MM(1), Scharnhop H, Ramadan H, Beuerle T, Beerhues L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig,
Mendelssohnstraße 1, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

Sorbus aucuparia cell cultures accumulate biphenyl and dibenzofuran phytoalexins 
in response to elicitor treatment. These polyketide derivatives arise from the
starter substrate benzoyl-CoA, the biosynthesis of which is largely unresolved.
Two CoA ligases involved are cinnamate:CoA ligase and benzoate:CoA ligase, which 
were assumed to be related in S. aucuparia to the ubiquitous 4-coumarate:CoA
ligase (4CL). cDNAs encoding three distinct 4CLs from elicitor-treated S.
aucuparia cell cultures were isolated using RT-PCR and RACE techniques and
functionally expressed in Escherichia coli as His(6)-tagged proteins (Sa4CL2 and 
Sa4CL3) or GST-fusion protein (Sa4CL1). All three isoenzymes preferred 4-coumaric
acid over cinnamic acid in spectrophotometric assays and failed to utilize
benzoic acid in radioisotopic assays. After elicitor treatment of S. aucuparia
cell cultures, the transcript levels of all three Sa4CLs increased but were
significantly lower than the maximum expression rates of the phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase (PAL) and biphenyl synthase 1 (BIS1) genes. The substrate
specificities and the expression profiles indicate that the three 4CL isoenzymes 
are not involved in benzoyl-CoA biosynthesis in S. aucuparia cell cultures.
Sa4CL3 and PAL transcripts also accumulated in response to light treatment.
Phylogenetically, Sa4CL1 and Sa4CL2 belong to the class I cluster and Sa4CL3
groups in the class II cluster. Sa4CL3 contains a 49-amino acid N-terminal
extension, which includes a chloroplast sorting signal.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2010.11.021 
PMID: 21330005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Planta. 2010 Aug;232(3):731-42. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1206-x. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Enzymes of phenylpropanoid metabolism in the important medicinal plant Melissa
officinalis L.

Weitzel C(1), Petersen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und Biotechnologie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Deutschhausstr 17A, 35037 Marburg, Germany.

Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, Lamiaceae) is a well-known medicinal plant.
Amongst the biologically active ingredients are a number of phenolic compounds,
the most prominent of which is rosmarinic acid. To obtain better knowledge of the
biosynthesis of these phenolic compounds, two enzymes of the general
phenylpropanoid pathway, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) and
4-coumarate:coenzyme A-ligase (4CL), were investigated in suspension cultures of 
lemon balm. MoPAL1 and Mo4CL1 cDNAs were cloned and heterologously expressed in
Escherichia coli and the enzymes characterised. Expression analysis of both genes
showed a correlation with the enzyme activities and rosmarinic acid content
during a cultivation period of the suspension culture. Southern-blot analysis
suggested the presence of most probably two gene copies in the M. officinalis
genome of both PAL and 4CL. The genomic DNA sequences of MoPAL1 and Mo4CL1 were
amplified and sequenced. MoPAL1 contains one phase 2 intron of 836 bp at a
conserved site, whilst Mo4CL1 was devoid of introns.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-010-1206-x 
PMID: 20563822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEMS Yeast Res. 2002 Aug;2(3):363-9.

High-level production and secretion of recombinant proteins by the dimorphic
yeast Arxula adeninivorans.

Wartmann T(1), Böer E, Pico AH, Sieber H, Bartelsen O, Gellissen G, Kunze G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, Corrensstr. 3,
D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

The non-conventional dimorphic thermo- and salt-resistant yeast Arxula
adeninivorans has been developed as a host for heterologous gene expression. For 
assessment of the system two model genes have been selected: the GFP gene
encoding the intracellular green fluorescent protein, and the HSA gene encoding
the secreted human serum albumin. The expression system includes two host
strains, namely A. adeninivorans LS3, which forms budding cells at 30 degrees C
and mycelia at >42 degrees C, and the strain A. adeninivorans 135, which forms
mycelia at temperatures as low as 30 degrees C. For expression control the
constitutive A. adeninivorans-derived TEF1-promoter and S. cerevisiae-derived
PHO5-terminator were selected. The basic A. adeninivorans
transformation/expression vector pAL-HPH1 is further equipped with the
Escherichia coli-derived hph gene conferring hygromycin B resistance and the 25S 
rDNA from A. adeninivorans for rDNA targeting. Transformants were obtained for
both budding cells and mycelia. In both cell types similar expression levels were
achieved and the GFP was localised in the cytoplasm while more than 95% of the
HSA accumulated in the culture medium. In initial fermentation trials on a 200-ml
shake flask scale maximal HSA product levels were observed after 96 h of
cultivation.

DOI: 10.1016/S1567-1356(02)00086-7 
PMID: 12702286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Feb;32(2):167-74.

Expression of ecdysteroid receptor and ultraspiracle from Chironomus tentans
(Insecta, Diptera) in E. coli and purification in a functional state.

Grebe M(1), Spindler-Barth M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Allgemeine Zoologie und Endokrinologie, Universität Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

Full length clones of ecdysteroid receptor (EcR) and Ultraspiracle (USP) from
Chironomus tentans were expressed as GST fusion proteins in E. coli and purified 
by affinity chromatography. The absence of detergents during the purification
procedure is essential for retaining receptor function, especially ligand
binding. Presence of USP is mandatory for ligand binding to EcR, but no other
cofactors or posttranslational modifications seem to be important, since
Scatchard plots revealed the same characteristics (two high affinity binding
sites for Ponasterone A with K(D1)=0.24+/-0.1nM and K(D2)=3.9+/-1.3.nM) as found 
in 0.4 M NaCl extracts of Chironomus cells. Gel mobility shift assays showed
binding of the heterodimer to PAL and DR5 even after removal of the GST-tag,
whereas EcR binding to PAL1 is GST-dependent. USP binds preferentially to DR5.
Addition of unprogrammed reticulocyte lysate improves ligand binding only
slightly. Removal of GST has no effect on (3)H-ponasterone A binding, but alters 
DNA binding characteristics. Calculation of specific binding (5.3+3.0 nmol/mg GST
EcR) revealed that 47+/-26% of purified receptor protein was able to bind ligand.
The addition of purified EcR to cell extracts of hormone resistant subclones of
the epithelial cell line from C. tentans, which have lost their ability to bind
ligand, restores specific binding of (3)H-ponasterone A.

DOI: 10.1016/s0965-1748(01)00098-4 
PMID: 11755059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(8):2425-30.

Cloning and characterization of the gene cluster for palatinose metabolism from
the phytopathogenic bacterium Erwinia rhapontici.

Börnke F(1), Hajirezaei M, Sonnewald U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, 06466 Gatersleben,
Germany.

Erwinia rhapontici is able to convert sucrose into isomaltulose (palatinose,
6-O-alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-D-fructose) and trehalulose
(1-O-alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-D-fructose) by the activity of a sucrose isomerase.
These sucrose isomers cannot be metabolized by plant cells and most other
organisms and therefore are possibly advantageous for the pathogen. This view is 
supported by the observation that in vitro yeast invertase activity can be
inhibited by palatinose, thus preventing sucrose consumption. Due to the lack of 
genetic information, the role of sucrose isomers in pathogenicity has not been
evaluated. Here we describe for the first time the cloning and characterization
of the palatinose (pal) genes from Erwinia rhapontici. To this end, a 15-kb
chromosomal DNA fragment containing nine complete open reading frames (ORFs) was 
cloned. The pal gene products of Erwinia rhapontici were shown to be homologous
to proteins involved in uptake and metabolism of various sugars from other
microorganisms. The palE, palF, palG, palH, palK, palQ, and palZ genes were
oriented divergently with respect to the palR and palI genes, and sequence
analysis suggested that the first set of genes constitutes an operon. Northern
blot analysis of RNA extracted from bacteria grown under various conditions
implies that the expression of the palI gene and the palEFGHKQZ genes is
oppositely regulated at the transcriptional level. Genes involved in palatinose
uptake and metabolism are down regulated by sucrose and activated by palatinose. 
Palatinose activation is inhibited by sucrose. Functional expression of palI and 
palQ in Escherichia coli revealed sucrose isomerase and palatinase activity,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.8.2425-2430.2001 
PMCID: PMC95157
PMID: 11274100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):491-9.

Structural and catalytic properties of the four phenylalanine ammonia-lyase
isoenzymes from parsley (Petroselinum crispum Nym.).

Appert C(1), Logemann E, Hahlbrock K, Schmid J, Amrhein N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzenwissenschaften, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule
Zürich, Switzerland.

Near-full-length cDNAs for the four phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) isoenzymes 
in parsley (Petroselium crispum Nym.) were cloned and the complete amino acid
sequences deduced. Fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase were expressed 
in Escherichia coli, purified and cleaved. All of the resulting phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase proteins, as well as the fusion proteins, were catalytically
active. The turnover number of one selected isoenzyme, PAL-1, was estimated to be
around 22 s-1 for each active site. In contrast to a certain degree of
differential expression in various parts of parsley plants, the four
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase isoenzymes exhibited very similar apparent Km values 
for L-phenylalanine (15-24.5 microM) as well as identical temperature (58 degrees
C) and pH (8.5) optima. All of them were competitively inhibited by (E)-cinnamate
with similar efficiency (Ki values: 9.1-21.5 microM), lacked cooperative
behaviour, and accepted L-tyrosine as a substrate with low affinity (Km values:
2.6-7.8 mM). These results suggest that the occurrence of multiple gene copies
has a function other than encoding isoenzymes with different enzyme kinetic
properties.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.00491.x 
PMID: 7925471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Infect Immun. 1991 Aug;59(8):2515-21.

Cloning, genetic analysis, and nucleotide sequence of a determinant coding for a 
19-kilodalton peptidoglycan-associated protein (Ppl) of Legionella pneumophila.

Ludwig B(1), Schmid A, Marre R, Hacker J.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

A genomic library of Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires 
disease in humans, was constructed in Escherichia coli K-12, and the recombinant 
clones were screened by immuno-colony blots with an antiserum raised against
heat-killed L. pneumophila. Twenty-three clones coding for a Legionella-specific 
protein of 19 kDa were isolated. The 19-kDa protein, which represents an outer
membrane protein, was found to be associated with the peptidoglycan layer both in
L. pneumophila and in the recombinant E. coli clones. This was shown by
electrophoresis and Western immunoblot analysis of bacterial cell membrane
fractions with a monospecific polyclonal 19-kDa protein-specific antiserum. The
protein was termed peptidoglycan-associated protein of L. pneumophila (Ppl). The 
corresponding genetic determinant, ppl, was subcloned on a 1.8-kb ClaI fragment. 
DNA sequence studies revealed that two open reading frames, pplA and pplB, coding
for putative proteins of 18.9 and 16.8 kDa, respectively, were located on the
ClaI fragment. Exonuclease III digestion studies confirmed that pplA is the gene 
coding for the peptidoglycan-associated 19-kDa protein of L. pneumophila. The
amino acid sequence of PplA exhibits a high degree of homology to the sequences
of the Pal lipoproteins of E. coli K-12 and Haemophilus influenzae.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.59.8.2515-2521.1991 
PMCID: PMC258049
PMID: 1855972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS Lett. 1989 Dec 4;258(2):335-8.

Expression in Escherichia coli of catalytically active phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase from parsley.

Schulz W(1), Eiben HG, Hahlbrock K.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Abteilung Biochemie, Kln, FRG.

In parsley (Petroselinum crispum), phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) is encoded
by 4 structurally similar genes. The nucleotide sequence of a near full-length
cDNA and the deduced amino acid sequence of PAL-4 are presented and compared with
the corresponding sequences of PAL-1, a previously described representative of
the gene family. Transformation of Escherichia coli cells with PAL-1 or PAL-4
cDNA yielded catalytically active PAL, suggesting that the catalytic center of
the enzyme is formed spontaneously rather than by a plant-specific mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(89)81687-4 
PMID: 2689222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rplL)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Apr 1;69(1):1-12.

L7 protein is a coregulator of vitamin D receptor-retinoid X receptor-mediated
transactivation.

Berghöfer-Hochheimer Y(1), Zurek C, Wölfl S, Hemmerich P, Munder T.

Author information: 
(1)Hans-Knöll-Institut für Naturstoff-Forschung e.V., Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Jena, Germany.

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) heterodimerizes with the retinoid X receptor (RXR)
and requires additional protein-protein interactions to regulate the expression
of target genes. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified the previously 
described protein L7, that specifically interacted with the VDR in the presence
of vitamin D. Deletion analysis indicated, that the N-terminus of L7, which
harbours a basic region leucine zipper like domain, mediated interaction with the
VDR. Binding assays with purified GST-L7 demonstrated, that L7 specifically
pulled down the VDR, that was either expressed in yeast or endogenously contained
in the cell line U937. Interestingly, L7 inhibited ligand-dependent VDR-RXR
heterodimerization, when constitutively expressed in yeast. We also demonstrate
that L7 repressed binding of VDR-RXR heterodimers to a vitamin D response
element. Surprisingly, L7 recruited RXR to the same response element in the
presence of 9-cis retinoic acid. Ligand-dependent protein-protein interaction in 
the yeast two-hybrid system confirmed, that binding of L7 also was targeted at
the RXR. Our data suggest, that protein L7 is a coregulator of VDR-RXR mediated
transactivation of genes, that modulates transcriptional activity by interfering 
with binding of the receptors to genomic enhancer elements.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4644(19980401)69:1<1::aid-jcb1>3.0.co;2-x 
PMID: 9513041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochimie. 1991 Jun;73(6):797-804.

The binding site of ribosomal protein L10 in eubacteria and archaebacteria is
conserved: reconstitution of chimeric 50S subunits.

Stöffler-Meilicke M(1), Stöffler G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt Wittmann, Berlin, Dahlem,
Germany.

It has been shown by electron microscopy that the selective removal of the stalk 
from 50S ribosomal subunits of two representative archaebacteria, namely
Methanococcus vaniellii and Sulfolobus solfataricus, is accompanied by loss of
the archaebacterial L10 and L12 proteins. The stalk was reformed if
archaebacterial core particles were reconstituted with their corresponding split 
proteins. Next, structurally intact chimeric 50S subunits have been reconstituted
in vitro by addition of Escherichia coli ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/L12 to 50S
core particles from M vaniellii or S solfataricus, respectively. In the reverse
experiment, using core particles from E coli and split proteins from M vaniellii,
stalk-bearing 50S particles were also obtained. Analysis of the reconstituted 50S
subunits by immunoblotting revealed that E coli L10 was incorporated into
archaebacterial core particles in both presence or absence of E coli L7/L12. In
contrast, incorporation of E coli L7/L12 into archaebacterial cores was only
possible in the presence of E coli L10. Our results suggest that in
archaebacteria - as in E coli - the stalk is formed by archaebacterial L12
proteins that bind to the ribosome via L10. The structural equivalence of
eubacterial and archaebacterial L10 and L12 proteins has thus for the first time 
been established. The chimeric reconstitution experiments provide evidence that
the domain of protein L10 that interacts with the ribosomal particle is highly
conserved between eubacteria and archaebacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90059-a 
PMID: 1764524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rpmB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochimie. 1991 Jul-Aug;73(7-8):855-60.

Characterization and primary structure of proteins L28, L33 and L34 from Bacillus
stearothermophilus ribosomes.

Kruft V(1), Kapp U, Wittmann-Liebold B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of 3 proteins from the 50S subunit of Bacillus 
stearothermophilus ribosomes were determined by N-terminal sequence analysis and 
by sequencing of overlapping fragments obtained from enzymatic digestions and
chemical cleavages. The proteins BstL28, BstL33 and BstL34, named according to
the equivalent proteins in Escherichia coli ribosomes, consist of 60, 49, and 44 
amino acid residues and have calculated molecular masses of 6811.0, 5908.6, and
5253.9 Da, respectively. They are highly basic with a content of positively
charged residues ranging between 29% for L33 and 45% for L34. The 3 proteins were
positioned in the 2-dimensional map of B stearothermophilus 50S ribosomal
proteins. The electrophoretic mobilities confirm sizes and net charges deduced
from the sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90126-l 
PMID: 1742360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rpmG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochimie. 1991 Jul-Aug;73(7-8):855-60.

Characterization and primary structure of proteins L28, L33 and L34 from Bacillus
stearothermophilus ribosomes.

Kruft V(1), Kapp U, Wittmann-Liebold B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of 3 proteins from the 50S subunit of Bacillus 
stearothermophilus ribosomes were determined by N-terminal sequence analysis and 
by sequencing of overlapping fragments obtained from enzymatic digestions and
chemical cleavages. The proteins BstL28, BstL33 and BstL34, named according to
the equivalent proteins in Escherichia coli ribosomes, consist of 60, 49, and 44 
amino acid residues and have calculated molecular masses of 6811.0, 5908.6, and
5253.9 Da, respectively. They are highly basic with a content of positively
charged residues ranging between 29% for L33 and 45% for L34. The 3 proteins were
positioned in the 2-dimensional map of B stearothermophilus 50S ribosomal
proteins. The electrophoretic mobilities confirm sizes and net charges deduced
from the sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90126-l 
PMID: 1742360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEBS Lett. 1988 Nov 21;240(1-2):21-8.

The primary structures of ribosomal proteins L16, L23 and L33 from the
archaebacterium Halobacterium marismortui.

Hatakeyama T(1), Hatakeyama T, Kimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of ribosomal proteins L16, L23 and L33 from the
archaebacterium Halobacterium marismortui were determined. The sequences were
established by manual sequencing of peptides produced with several proteases as
well as by cleavage with dilute HCl. Proteins L16, L23 and L33 consist of 119,
154 and 69 amino acid residues, and their molecular masses are 13,538, 16,812 and
7620 Da, respectively. The comparison of their sequences with those of ribosomal 
proteins from other organisms revealed that L23 and L33 are related to
eubacterial ribosomal proteins from Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, while protein L16 was found to be homologous to a eukaryotic 
ribosomal protein from yeast. These results provide information about the special
phylogenetic position of archaebacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(88)80333-8 
PMID: 3191994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (sodB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Res. 2021 Jan;242:126629. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629. Epub 2020 
Oct 22.

Participation of two sRNA RyhB homologs from the fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri
in bacterial physiology.

Acuña LG(1), Barros MJ(2), Montt F(3), Peñaloza D(4), Núñez P(5), Valdés I(6),
Gil F(7), Fuentes JA(8), Calderón IL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lillian.gabriela@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: mbarrosgamonal@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: fernanda.monttc@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: diego.ignacio.mp@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: paulanunezrojas@gmail.com.
(6)Desarrollo de Biológicos, Veterquímica S.A., Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: ivaldes@veterquimica.cl.
(7)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: fernandogil@unab.cl.
(8)Laboratorio de Genética y Patogénesis Bacteriana, Departamento de Ciencias
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, 
Chile. Electronic address: jfuentes@unab.cl.
(9)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lcalderon@unab.cl.

Small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression and
physiology in bacteria. RyhB is an iron-responsive sRNA well characterized in
Escherichia coli and conserved in other Enterobacteriaceae. In this study, we
identified and characterized two RyhB homologs (named RyhB-1 and RyhB-2) in the
fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri. We found that, as in other Enterobacteriaceae,
both RyhB-1 and RyhB-2 are induced under iron starvation, repressed by the Fur
regulator, and depend on Hfq for stability. Despite these similarities in
expression, the mutant strains of Y. ruckeri lacking RyhB-1 (ΔryhB-1) or RyhB-2
(ΔryhB-2) exhibited differential phenotypes. In comparison with the wild type,
the ΔryhB-1 strain showed a hypermotile phenotype, reduced biofilm formation,
increased replication rate, faster growth, and increased ATP levels in bacterial 
cultures. By contrast, in salmon cell cultures, the ΔryhB-1 strain exhibited an
increased survival. On the other hand, the ΔryhB-2 strain was non-motile and
showed augmented biofilm formation as compared to the wild type. The expression
of a subset of RyhB conserved targets, selected from different bacterial species,
was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR in wild type, ΔryhB-1, ΔryhB-2, and ΔryhB-1
ΔryhB-2 strains cultured in iron-depleted media. RyhB-1 negatively affected the
expression of most analyzed genes (sodB, acnA, sdhC, bfr, fliF, among others),
whose functions are related to metabolism and motility, involving iron-containing
proteins. Among the genes analyzed, only sdhC and bfr appeared as targets for
RyhB-2. Taken together, these results indicate that Y. ruckeri RyhB homologs
participate in the modulation of the bacterial physiology with non-redundant
roles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629 
PMID: 33153884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microb Cell Fact. 2019 Feb 7;18(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12934-019-1080-6.

Direct pathway cloning of the sodorifen biosynthetic gene cluster and recombinant
generation of its product in E. coli.

Duell ER(1), D'Agostino PM(1), Shapiro N(2), Woyke T(2), Fuchs TM(3)(4), Gulder
TAM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biosystems Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Center for Integrated
Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße
4, 85748, Garching, Germany.
(2)Department of Energy, Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut
Creek, CA, 94598, USA.
(3)ZIEL Institute for Food & Health, Lehrstuhl für Mikrobielle Ökologie,
Department biowissenschaftliche Grundlagen, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(4)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institut für Molekulare Pathogenese, Jena,
Germany.
(5)Biosystems Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Center for Integrated
Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße
4, 85748, Garching, Germany. tobias.gulder@ch.tum.de.
(6)Chair of Technical Biochemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Bergstraße
66, 01602, Dresden, Germany. tobias.gulder@ch.tum.de.

BACKGROUND: Serratia plymuthica WS3236 was selected for whole genome sequencing
based on preliminary genetic and chemical screening indicating the presence of
multiple natural product pathways. This led to the identification of a putative
sodorifen biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC). The natural product sodorifen is a
volatile organic compound (VOC) with an unusual polymethylated hydrocarbon
bicyclic structure (C16H26) produced by selected strains of S. plymuthica. The
BGC encoding sodorifen consists of four genes, two of which (sodA, sodB) are
homologs of genes encoding enzymes of the non-mevalonate pathway and are thought 
to enhance the amounts of available farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), the precursor
of sodorifen. Proceeding from FPP, only two enzymes are necessary to produce
sodorifen: an S-adenosyl methionine dependent methyltransferase (SodC) with
additional cyclisation activity and a terpene-cyclase (SodD). Previous analysis
of S. plymuthica found sodorifen production titers are generally low and vary
significantly among different producer strains. This precludes studies on the
still elusive biological function of this structurally and biosynthetically
fascinating bacterial terpene.
RESULTS: Sequencing and mining of the S. plymuthica WS3236 genome revealed the
presence of 38 BGCs according to antiSMASH analysis, including a putative
sodorifen BGC. Further genome mining for sodorifen and sodorifen-like BGCs
throughout bacteria was performed using SodC and SodD as queries and identified a
total of 28 sod-like gene clusters. Using direct pathway cloning (DiPaC) we
intercepted the 4.6 kb candidate sodorifen BGC from S. plymuthica WS3236 (sodA-D)
and transformed it into Escherichia coli BL21. Heterologous expression under the 
control of the tetracycline inducible PtetO promoter firmly linked this BGC to
sodorifen production. By utilizing this newly established expression system, we
increased the production yields by approximately 26-fold when compared to the
native producer. In addition, sodorifen was easily isolated in high purity by
simple head-space sampling.
CONCLUSIONS: Genome mining of all available genomes within the NCBI and JGI IMG
databases led to the identification of a wealth of sod-like pathways which may be
responsible for producing a range of structurally unknown sodorifen analogs.
Introduction of the S. plymuthica WS3236 sodorifen BGC into the fast-growing
heterologous expression host E. coli with a very low VOC background led to a
significant increase in both sodorifen product yield and purity compared to the
native producer. By providing a reliable, high-level production system, this
study sets the stage for future investigations of the biological role and
function of sodorifen and for functionally unlocking the bioinformatically
identified putative sod-like pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1080-6 
PMCID: PMC6366047
PMID: 30732610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jun 6;114(23):6022-6027. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1703576114. Epub 2017 May 22.

Mechanism of H2S-mediated protection against oxidative stress in Escherichia
coli.

Mironov A(1)(2), Seregina T(2), Nagornykh M(2), Luhachack LG(3), Korolkova N(1), 
Lopes LE(1), Kotova V(1), Zavilgelsky G(1), Shakulov R(1), Shatalin K(3), Nudler 
E(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, State Research Institute of Genetics and Selection of 
Industrial Microorganisms, Moscow 117545, Russia.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology,
Russian Academy of Science, Moscow 119991, Russia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016; evgeny.nudler@nyumc.org.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016.

Endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) renders bacteria highly resistant to oxidative 
stress, but its mechanism remains poorly understood. Here, we report that
3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (3MST) is the major source of endogenous H2S
in Escherichia coli Cellular resistance to H2O2 strongly depends on the activity 
of mstA, a gene that encodes 3MST. Deletion of the ferric uptake regulator (Fur) 
renders ∆mstA cells hypersensitive to H2O2 Conversely, induction of chromosomal
mstA from a strong pLtetO-1 promoter (P tet -mstA) renders ∆fur cells fully
resistant to H2O2 Furthermore, the endogenous level of H2S is reduced in ∆fur or 
∆sodA ∆sodB cells but restored after the addition of an iron chelator dipyridyl. 
Using a highly sensitive reporter of the global response to DNA damage (SOS) and 
the TUNEL assay, we show that 3MST-derived H2S protects chromosomal DNA from
oxidative damage. We also show that the induction of the CysB regulon in response
to oxidative stress depends on 3MST, whereas the CysB-regulated l-cystine
transporter, TcyP, plays the principle role in the 3MST-mediated generation of
H2S. These findings led us to propose a model to explain the interplay between
l-cysteine metabolism, H2S production, and oxidative stress, in which 3MST
protects E. coli against oxidative stress via l-cysteine utilization and
H2S-mediated sequestration of free iron necessary for the genotoxic Fenton
reaction.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1703576114 
PMCID: PMC5468659
PMID: 28533366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Aug 19;44(14):6707-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw273. Epub 2016
Apr 16.

Transcript degradation and noise of small RNA-controlled genes in a switch
activated network in Escherichia coli.

Arbel-Goren R(1), Tal A(1), Parasar B(1), Dym A(1), Costantino N(2), Muñoz-García
J(3), Court DL(4), Stavans J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.
(2)Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.
(3)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel Departamento de Matemáticas and GISC, Universidad Carlos
III de Madrid, Av. de la Universidad 30, 28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA courtd@mail.nih.gov.
(5)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel joel.stavans@weizmann.ac.il.

Post-transcriptional regulatory processes may change transcript levels and affect
cell-to-cell variability or noise. We study small-RNA downregulation to elucidate
its effects on noise in the iron homeostasis network of Escherichia coli In this 
network, the small-RNA RyhB undergoes stoichiometric degradation with the
transcripts of target genes in response to iron stress. Using single-molecule
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we measured transcript numbers of the
RyhB-regulated genes sodB and fumA in individual cells as a function of iron
deprivation. We observed a monotonic increase of noise with iron stress but no
evidence of theoretically predicted, enhanced stoichiometric fluctuations in
transcript numbers, nor of bistable behavior in transcript distributions. Direct 
detection of RyhB in individual cells shows that its noise is much smaller than
that of these two targets, when RyhB production is significant. A generalized
two-state model of bursty transcription that neglects RyhB fluctuations describes
quantitatively the dependence of noise and transcript distributions on iron
deprivation, enabling extraction of in vivo RyhB-mediated transcript degradation 
rates. The transcripts' threshold-linear behavior indicates that the effective in
vivo interaction strength between RyhB and its two target transcripts is
comparable. Strikingly, the bacterial cell response exhibits Fur-dependent,
switch-like activation instead of a graded response to iron deprivation.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw273 
PMCID: PMC5001584
PMID: 27085802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091243. eCollection
2014.

A mixed incoherent feed-forward loop allows conditional regulation of response
dynamics.

Semsey S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Models of Life, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Expression of the SodA superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in Escherichia coli is
regulated by superoxide concentration through the SoxRS system and also by Fur
(Ferric uptake regulator) through a mixed incoherent feed forward loop (FFL)
containing the RyhB small regulatory RNA. In this work I theoretically analyze
the function of this feed forward loop as part of the network controlling
expression of the two cytoplasmic superoxide dismutases, SodA and SodB. I find
that feed forward regulation allows faster response to superoxide stress at low
intracellular iron levels compared to iron rich conditions. That is, it can
conditionally modulate the response time of a superimposed transcriptional
control mechanism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091243 
PMCID: PMC3951346
PMID: 24621982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Oct 21;11:236. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-236.

The Fur regulon in anaerobically grown Salmonella enterica sv. Typhimurium:
identification of new Fur targets.

Troxell B(1), Fink RC, Porwollik S, McClelland M, Hassan HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695-7615, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Ferric uptake regulator (Fur) is a transcriptional regulator that
controls iron homeostasis in bacteria. Although the regulatory role of Fur in
Escherichia coli is well characterized, most of the studies were conducted under 
routine culture conditions, i.e., in ambient oxygen concentration. To reveal
potentially novel aspects of the Fur regulon in Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium under oxygen conditions similar to that encountered in the host, we
compared the transcriptional profiles of the virulent wild-type strain (ATCC
14028s) and its isogenic Δfur strain under anaerobic conditions.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of anaerobically grown Δfur S. Typhimurium
identified 298 differentially expressed genes. Expression of several genes
controlled by Fnr and NsrR appeared to be also dependent on Fur. Furthermore, Fur
was required for the activity of the cytoplasmic superoxide disumutases (MnSOD
and FeSOD). The regulation of FeSOD gene, sodB, occurred via small RNAs (i.e.,
the ryhB homologs, rfrA and rfrB) with the aid of the RNA chaperone Hfq. The
transcription of sodA was increased in Δfur; however, the enzyme was inactive due
to the incorporation of iron instead of manganese in SodA. Additionally, in Δfur,
the expression of the gene coding for the ferritin-like protein (ftnB) was
down-regulated, while the transcription of the gene coding for the nitric oxide
(NO·) detoxifying flavohemoglobin (hmpA) was up-regulated. The promoters of ftnB 
and hmpA do not contain recognized Fur binding motifs, which indicated their
probable indirect regulation by Fur. However, Fur activation of ftnB was
independent of Fnr. In addition, the expression of the gene coding for the
histone-like protein, H-NS (hns) was increased in Δfur. This may explain the
observed down-regulation of the tdc operon, responsible for the anaerobic
degradation of threonine, and ftnB in Δfur.
CONCLUSIONS: This study determined that Fur is a positive factor in ftnB
regulation, while serving to repress the expression of hmpA. Furthermore, Fur is 
required for the proper expression and activation of the antioxidant enzymes,
FeSOD and MnSOD. Finally, this work identified twenty-six new targets of Fur
regulation, and demonstrates that H-NS repressed genes are down-regulated in
Δfur.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-236 
PMCID: PMC3212961
PMID: 22017966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2009 Feb;191(4):1330-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.00849-08. Epub 2008 Dec 5.

The Hfq-dependent small noncoding RNA NrrF directly mediates Fur-dependent
positive regulation of succinate dehydrogenase in Neisseria meningitidis.

Metruccio MM(1), Fantappiè L, Serruto D, Muzzi A, Roncarati D, Donati C, Scarlato
V, Delany I.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Vaccines, Via Fiorentina 1, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Previous microarray studies have suggested that an indirect mechanism of Fur
regulation may be present in meningococcus at the posttranscriptional level
through a small regulatory RNA (sRNA) system analogous to that of Escherichia
coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Recently, a Fur-regulated sRNA, NrrF, was
identified that is involved in the iron regulation of the sdhA and sdhC succinate
dehydrogenase genes. Here we report a detailed transcriptional analysis of the
nrrF gene and show that NrrF is a Hfq-dependent sRNA. The Hfq protein mediates
nrrF downregulation and Fur-dependent upregulation of the sdhCDAB operon, the
major in vivo NrrF-regulated operon. NrrF forms a duplex in vitro with a region
of complementarity overlapping the sdhDA mRNA junction. Furthermore, Hfq binds to
NrrF in vitro and considerably enhances the efficiency of the interaction of the 
sRNA with the identified target. Our data suggest that Hfq-meditated binding of
NrrF to the in vivo target in the sdhCDAB mRNA may cause the rapid degradation of
the transcript, resulting in Fur-dependent positive regulation of succinate
dehydrogenase. In addition, while the upregulation of sodB and fumB by Fur is
dependent on the Hfq protein, it is unaffected in the nrrF knockout, which
suggests that there is more than one sRNA regulator involved in iron homeostasis 
in meningococcus.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00849-08 
PMCID: PMC2631994
PMID: 19060140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Dec;74(24):7643-53. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01490-08. Epub 
2008 Oct 24.

Possible involvement of an extracellular superoxide dismutase (SodA) as a radical
scavenger in poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) degradation.

Schulte C(1), Arenskötter M, Berekaa MM, Arenskötter Q, Priefert H, Steinbüchel
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekulare Mikrobiologie und Biotechnologie, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Correnstrasse 3, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Gordonia westfalica Kb1 and Gordonia polyisoprenivorans VH2 induce the formation 
of an extracellular superoxide dismutase (SOD) during poly(cis-1,4-isoprene)
degradation. To investigate the function of this enzyme in G. polyisoprenivorans 
VH2, the sodA gene was disrupted. The mutants exhibited reduced growth in liquid 
mineral salt media containing poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) as the sole carbon and
energy source, and no SOD activity was detectable in the supernatants of the
cultures. Growth experiments revealed that SodA activity is required for optimal 
growth on poly(cis-1,4-isoprene), whereas this enzyme has no effect on aerobic
growth in the presence of water-soluble substrates like succinate, acetate, and
propionate. This was detected by activity staining, and proof of expression was
by antibody detection of SOD. When SodA from G. westfalica Kb1 was heterologously
expressed in the sodA sodB double mutant Escherichia coli QC779, the recombinant 
mutant exhibited increased resistance to paraquat, thereby indicating the
functionality of the G. westfalica Kb1 SodA and indirectly protection of G.
westfalica cells by SodA from oxidative damage. Both sodA from G.
polyisoprenivorans VH2 and sodA from G. westfalica Kb1 coded for polypeptides
comprising 209 amino acids and having approximately 90% and 70% identical amino
acids, respectively, to the SodA from Mycobacterium smegmatis strain MC(2) 155
and Micrococcus luteus NCTC 2665. As revealed by activity staining experiments
with the wild type and the disruption mutant of G. polyisoprenivorans, this
bacterium harbors only one active SOD belonging to the manganese family. The
N-terminal sequences of the extracellular SodA proteins of both Gordonia species 
showed no evidence of leader peptides for the mature proteins, like the
intracellular SodA protein of G. polyisoprenivorans VH2, which was purified under
native conditions from the cells. In G. westfalica Kb1 and G. polyisoprenivorans 
VH2, SodA probably provides protection against reactive oxygen intermediates
which occur during degradation of poly(cis-1,4-isoprene).

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01490-08 
PMCID: PMC2607186
PMID: 18952871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Free Radic Res. 2005 Nov;39(11):1173-82.

Up-expression of NapA and other oxidative stress proteins is a compensatory
response to loss of major Helicobacter pylori stress resistance factors.

Olczak AA(1), Wang G, Maier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, 30602, USA.

Twenty-six Helicobacter pylori targeted mutant strains with deficiencies in
oxidative stress combating proteins, including 12 double mutant strains were
analyzed via physiological and proteomic approaches to distinguish the major
expression changes caused by the mutations. Mutations were introduced into both a
Mtz(S) and a Mtz(R) strain background. Most of the mutations caused increased
growth sensitivity of the strains to oxygen, and they all exhibited clear
compensatory up-expression of oxidative stress resistance proteins enabling
survival of the bacterium. The most frequent up-expressed oxidative stress
resistance factor (observed in 16 of the mutants) was the iron-sequestering
protein NapA, linking iron sequestration with oxidative stress resistance. The
up-expression of individual proteins in mutants ranged from 2 to 10 fold that of 
the wild type strain, even when incubated in a low O(2) environment. For example,
a considerably higher level of catalase expression (4 fold of that in the
wild-type strain) was observed in ahpC napA and ahpC sodB double mutants. A Fur
mutant up-expressed ferritin (Pfr) protein 20-fold. In some mutant strains the
bacterial DNA is protected from oxidative stress damage apparently via
overexpression of oxidative stress-combating proteins such as NapA, catalase or
MdaB (an NADPH quinone reductase). Our results show that H. pylori has a variety 
of ways to compensate for loss of major oxidative stress combating factors.

DOI: 10.1080/10715760500306729 
PMID: 16298743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2005 Oct;187(20):6962-71.

Effect of RyhB small RNA on global iron use in Escherichia coli.

Massé E(1), Vanderpool CK, Gottesman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. eric.masse@usherbrooke.ca

Comment in
    J Bacteriol. 2005 Oct;187(20):6870-3.

RyhB is a noncoding RNA regulated by the Fur repressor. It has previously been
shown to cause the rapid degradation of a number of mRNAs that encode proteins
that utilize iron. Here we examine the effect of ectopic RyhB production on
global gene expression by microarray analysis. Many of the previously identified 
targets were found, as well as other mRNAs encoding iron-binding proteins,
bringing the total number of regulated operons to at least 18, encoding 56 genes.
The two major operons involved in Fe-S cluster assembly showed different
behavior; the isc operon appears to be a direct target of RyhB action, while the 
suf operon does not. This is consistent with previous findings suggesting that
the suf genes but not the isc genes are important for Fe-S cluster synthesis
under iron-limiting conditions, presumably for essential iron-binding proteins.
In addition, we observed repression of Fur-regulated genes upon RyhB expression, 
interpreted as due to intracellular iron sparing resulting from reduced synthesis
of iron-binding proteins. Our results demonstrate the broad effects of a single
noncoding RNA on iron homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.20.6962-6971.2005 
PMCID: PMC1251601
PMID: 16199566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. N Biotechnol. 2008 Jun;25(1):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 May
16.

SRP and Sec pathway leader peptides for antibody phage display and antibody
fragment production in E. coli.

Thie H(1), Schirrmann T, Paschke M, Dübel S, Hust M.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Biochemie und
Biotechnologie, Abteilung Biotechnologie, Spielmannstr. 7, 38106 Braunschweig,
Germany.

Antibody phage display is a key technology for the generation of recombinant
(human) antibodies for research, diagnostics and therapy. Most antibody fragments
can only be folded correctly in the oxidizing environment of the periplasm of
Escherichia coli. A multitude of leader peptides has been used for secretion of
antibody::pIII fusion proteins into the periplasm, but a systematic study of
their impact on the performance of antibody phage display systems has not been
reported so far. In this work we have analysed the influence of various leader
peptides on antibody phage display efficiency and production yields of soluble
antibody fragments. Four leader peptides using the Sec pathway (PelB, OmpA, PhoA 
and pIII) and three using the SRP pathway (DsbA, TorT and TolB) were compared.
Both pathways are compatible with antibody phage display and the production of
soluble antibody fragments. The applicability of the SRP pathway to antibody
phage display and the production of functional scFvs is shown here for the first 
time.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbt.2008.01.001 
PMID: 18504019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):365-77. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

Iron acquisition in the dental pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans:
what does it use as a source and how does it get this essential metal?

Rhodes ER(1), Menke S, Shoemaker C, Tomaras AP, McGillivary G, Actis LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Miami University, 40 Pearson Hall, Oxford, OH
45056, USA.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans requires iron to grow under limiting
conditions imposed by synthetic and natural chelators. Although none of the
strains tested used hemoglobin, lactoferrin or transferrin, all of them used
FeCl3 and hemin as iron sources under chelated conditions. Dot-blot binding
assays showed that all strains bind lactoferrin, hemoglobin, and hemin but not
transferrin. When compared with smooth strains, the rough isolates showed higher 
hemin binding activity, which was sensitive to proteinase K treatment. A.
actinomycetemcomitans harbors the Fur-regulated afeABCD locus coding for iron
acquisition in isogenic and non-isogenic cell backgrounds. The genome of this
oral pathogen also harbors several other predicted iron uptake genes including
the hitABC locus, which restored iron acquisition in the E. coli 1017 ent mutant.
However, the disruption of this locus in the parental strain did not affect iron 
acquisition as drastically as the inactivation of AfeABCD, suggesting that the
latter system could be more involved in iron transport than the HitABC system.
The genome of this oral pathogen also harbors an active copy of the exbBexbDtonB 
operon, which could provide the energy needed for hemin acquisition. However,
inactivation of each coding region of this operon did not affect the hemin and
iron acquisition phenotypes of isogenic derivatives. This observation suggests
that the function of these proteins could be replaced by those coded for by tolQ,
tolR and tolA as it was described for other bacterial transport systems.
Interruption of a hasR homolog, an actively transcribed gene that is predicted to
code for an outer membrane hemophore receptor protein, did not affect the ability
of an isogenic derivative to bind and use hemin under chelated conditions. This
result also indicates that A. actinomycetemcomitans could produce more than one
outer membrane hemin receptor as it was described in other human pathogens. All
strains tested formed biofilms on plastic under iron-rich and iron-chelated
conditions. However, smooth strains attached poorly and formed weaker biofilms
when compared with rough isolates. The incubation of rough cells in the presence 
of FeCl3 or hemin resulted in an increased number of smaller aggregates and
microcolonies as compared to the fewer but larger aggregates formed when cells
were grown in the presence of dipyridyl.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9058-3 
PMID: 17206384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(11):2836-41.

Effects of iron and temperature on expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tolQRA genes: role of the ferric uptake regulator.

Lafontaine ER(1), Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

The tolQRA genes have been recently identified in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO. In 
this study, we examined the effect of iron and temperature on tolQRA expression. 
A promoterless lacZ gene was introduced downstream of plasmid-encoded tolQ and
tolA, and expression was monitored by measuring beta-galactosidase activity of
cultures. Addition of 25 microM FeCl3 to the culture medium reduced tolQRA
expression by 50 to 60% in PAO but by only 25% in the fur mutant PAO A4. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that iron regulation occurs at the level of
transcription and involves the P. aeruginosa ferric uptake regulator (Fur).
Primer extension analysis was used to identify the proposed transcriptional start
site of tolA. Although a putative Fur box was identified 20 bp upstream of the
proposed start site, purified Fur did not bind to the tolA or tolQR promoter
regions in an in vitro gel retardation assay. Therefore, iron regulation of the
tol genes appears to involve an intermediate regulatory gene. Expression of tolQR
and tolA was optimal at 37 degrees C and was reduced by 40 to 50% when cultures
were grown at either 42 or 25 degreesC. Growth in high-iron medium at 25 degrees 
C further reduced tolQR and tolA expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.11.2836-2841.1998 
PMCID: PMC107246
PMID: 9603869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 30;93(9):4409-14.

Gene repression by the ferric uptake regulator in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: cycle
selection of iron-regulated genes.

Ochsner UA(1), Vasil ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Science Center,
Denver 80262, USA.

The expression of at least 24 distinct genes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 is
under direct control of the "ferric uptake regulator" (Fur). Novel targets of the
Fur protein were isolated in a powerful SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by
exponential enrichment)-like cycle selection consisting of in vitro DNA-Fur
interaction, binding to anti-Fur antibody, purification on protein G, and PCR
amplification. DNA fragments obtained after at least three exponential enrichment
cycles were cloned and subjected to DNA mobility-shift assays and DNase I
footprint analyses to verify the specific interaction with the Fur protein in
vitro. Iron-dependent expression of the corresponding genes in vivo was monitored
by RNase protection analysis. In total, 20 different DNA fragments were
identified which represent actual Pseudomonas iron-regulated genes (PIGs). While 
four PIGs are identical to already known genes (pfeR, pvdS, tonB, and fumC,
respectively), 16 PIGs represent previously unknown genes. Homology studies of
the putative proteins encoded by the PIGs allowed us to speculate about their
possible function. Two PIG products were highly similar to siderophore receptors 
from various species, and three PIG products were significantly homologous to
alternative sigma factors. Furthermore, homologs of the Escherichia coli
ORF1-tolQ, nuoA, stringent starvation protein Ssp, and of a two-component
regulatory system similar to the Pseudomonas syringae LemA sensor kinase were
identified. The putative gene products of seven additional PIGs did not show
significant homologies to any known proteins. The PIGs were mapped on the
P.aeruginosa chromosome. Their possible role in iron metabolism and virulence of 
P. aeruginosa is discussed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.9.4409 
PMCID: PMC39551
PMID: 8633080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):365-77. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

Iron acquisition in the dental pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans:
what does it use as a source and how does it get this essential metal?

Rhodes ER(1), Menke S, Shoemaker C, Tomaras AP, McGillivary G, Actis LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Miami University, 40 Pearson Hall, Oxford, OH
45056, USA.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans requires iron to grow under limiting
conditions imposed by synthetic and natural chelators. Although none of the
strains tested used hemoglobin, lactoferrin or transferrin, all of them used
FeCl3 and hemin as iron sources under chelated conditions. Dot-blot binding
assays showed that all strains bind lactoferrin, hemoglobin, and hemin but not
transferrin. When compared with smooth strains, the rough isolates showed higher 
hemin binding activity, which was sensitive to proteinase K treatment. A.
actinomycetemcomitans harbors the Fur-regulated afeABCD locus coding for iron
acquisition in isogenic and non-isogenic cell backgrounds. The genome of this
oral pathogen also harbors several other predicted iron uptake genes including
the hitABC locus, which restored iron acquisition in the E. coli 1017 ent mutant.
However, the disruption of this locus in the parental strain did not affect iron 
acquisition as drastically as the inactivation of AfeABCD, suggesting that the
latter system could be more involved in iron transport than the HitABC system.
The genome of this oral pathogen also harbors an active copy of the exbBexbDtonB 
operon, which could provide the energy needed for hemin acquisition. However,
inactivation of each coding region of this operon did not affect the hemin and
iron acquisition phenotypes of isogenic derivatives. This observation suggests
that the function of these proteins could be replaced by those coded for by tolQ,
tolR and tolA as it was described for other bacterial transport systems.
Interruption of a hasR homolog, an actively transcribed gene that is predicted to
code for an outer membrane hemophore receptor protein, did not affect the ability
of an isogenic derivative to bind and use hemin under chelated conditions. This
result also indicates that A. actinomycetemcomitans could produce more than one
outer membrane hemin receptor as it was described in other human pathogens. All
strains tested formed biofilms on plastic under iron-rich and iron-chelated
conditions. However, smooth strains attached poorly and formed weaker biofilms
when compared with rough isolates. The incubation of rough cells in the presence 
of FeCl3 or hemin resulted in an increased number of smaller aggregates and
microcolonies as compared to the fewer but larger aggregates formed when cells
were grown in the presence of dipyridyl.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9058-3 
PMID: 17206384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(11):2836-41.

Effects of iron and temperature on expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tolQRA genes: role of the ferric uptake regulator.

Lafontaine ER(1), Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

The tolQRA genes have been recently identified in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO. In 
this study, we examined the effect of iron and temperature on tolQRA expression. 
A promoterless lacZ gene was introduced downstream of plasmid-encoded tolQ and
tolA, and expression was monitored by measuring beta-galactosidase activity of
cultures. Addition of 25 microM FeCl3 to the culture medium reduced tolQRA
expression by 50 to 60% in PAO but by only 25% in the fur mutant PAO A4. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that iron regulation occurs at the level of
transcription and involves the P. aeruginosa ferric uptake regulator (Fur).
Primer extension analysis was used to identify the proposed transcriptional start
site of tolA. Although a putative Fur box was identified 20 bp upstream of the
proposed start site, purified Fur did not bind to the tolA or tolQR promoter
regions in an in vitro gel retardation assay. Therefore, iron regulation of the
tol genes appears to involve an intermediate regulatory gene. Expression of tolQR
and tolA was optimal at 37 degrees C and was reduced by 40 to 50% when cultures
were grown at either 42 or 25 degreesC. Growth in high-iron medium at 25 degrees 
C further reduced tolQR and tolA expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.11.2836-2841.1998 
PMCID: PMC107246
PMID: 9603869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (trxB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jan;185(1):115-25.

Global role for ClpP-containing proteases in stationary-phase adaptation of
Escherichia coli.

Weichart D(1), Querfurth N, Dreger M, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 12-16, 14195 Berlin, Germany. weichart@zedat.fu-berlin.de

To elucidate the involvement of proteolysis in the regulation of stationary-phase
adaptation, the clpA, clpX, and clpP protease mutants of Escherichia coli were
subjected to proteome analysis during growth and during carbon starvation. For
most of the growth-phase-regulated proteins detected on our gels, the clpA, clpX,
or clpP mutant failed to mount the growth-phase regulation found in the wild
type. For example, in the clpP and clpA mutant cultures, the Dps protein, the
WrbA protein, and the periplasmic lysine-arginine-ornithine binding protein ArgT 
did not display the induction typical for late-stationary-phase wild-type cells. 
On the other hand, in the protease mutants, a number of proteins accumulated to a
higher degree than in the wild type, especially in late stationary phase. The
proteins affected in this manner include the LeuA, TrxB, GdhA, GlnA, and MetK
proteins and alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (AhpC). These proteins may be directly
degraded by ClpAP or ClpXP, respectively, or their expression could be modulated 
by a protease-dependent mechanism. From our data we conclude that the levels of
most major growth-phase-regulated proteins in E. coli are at some point
controlled by the activity of at least one of the ClpP, ClpA, and ClpX proteins. 
Cultures of the strains lacking functional ClpP or ClpX also displayed a more
rapid loss of viability during extended stationary phase than the wild type.
Therefore, regulation by proteolysis seems to be more important, especially in
resting cells, than previously suspected.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.1.115-125.2003 
PMCID: PMC141834
PMID: 12486047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Protein Expr Purif. 2001 Jun;22(1):108-12.

Accurate disulfide formation in Escherichia coli: overexpression and
characterization of the first domain (HF6478) of the multiple Kazal-type
inhibitor LEKTI.

Lauber T(1), Marx UC, Schulz A, Kreutzmann P, Rösch P, Hoffmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biopolymere, Universität Bayreuth, Universitätstrasse 30, 95447 
Bayreuth, Germany.

The human hemofiltrate peptide HF6478, a putative serine proteinase inhibitor,
which is part of the precursor protein LEKTI, was cloned, overexpressed, and
purified. HF6478 contains two disulfide bridges with 1-4, 2-3 connectivity,
sharing partial homology to Kazal-type domains and other serine proteinase
inhibitors. It was expressed as thioredoxin (Trx) fusion protein, and disulfide
formation occurred in the oxidative cytoplasm of Escherichia coli Origami (DE3)
strain which carries a trxB(-)/gor522(-) double mutation. The soluble fusion
protein was purified using metal-chelating affinity chromatography. Cleavage of
the Trx fusion protein with factor Xa and subsequent purification yielded the
final product in amounts sufficient for structural studies. Characterization of
recombinant HF6478 was done by amino acid sequencing, mass spectrometry,
capillary zone electrophoresis, and CD spectroscopy. Taking the blood filtrate
peptide HF6478 as example, we present a strategy which should facilitate the
expression of different extracellular proteins in the E. coli cytoplasm.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.2001.1415 
PMID: 11388807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Immun. 2001 Jun;69(6):3744-54.

PerR controls oxidative stress resistance and iron storage proteins and is
required for virulence in Staphylococcus aureus.

Horsburgh MJ(1), Clements MO, Crossley H, Ingham E, Foster SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, England.

The Staphylococcus aureus genome encodes three ferric uptake regulator (Fur)
homologues: Fur, PerR, and Zur. To determine the exact role of PerR, we
inactivated the gene by allelic replacement using a kanamycin cassette, creating 
strain MJH001 (perR). PerR was found to control transcription of the genes
encoding the oxidative stress resistance proteins catalase (KatA), alkyl
hydroperoxide reductase (AhpCF), bacterioferritin comigratory protein (Bcp), and 
thioredoxin reductase (TrxB). Furthermore, PerR regulates transcription of the
genes encoding the iron storage proteins ferritin (Ftn) and the ferritin-like Dps
homologue, MrgA. Transcription of perR was autoregulated, and PerR repressed
transcription of the iron homeostasis regulator Fur, which is a positive
regulator of catalase expression. PerR functions as a manganese-dependent,
transcriptional repressor of the identified regulon. Elevated iron concentrations
produced induction of the PerR regulon. PerR may act as a peroxide sensor, since 
addition of external hydrogen peroxide to 8325-4 (wild type) resulted in
increased transcription of most of the PerR regulon, except for fur and perR
itself. The PerR-regulated katA gene encodes the sole catalase of S. aureus,
which is an important starvation survival determinant but is surprisingly not
required for pathogenicity in a murine skin abscess model of infection. In
contrast, PerR is not necessary for starvation survival but is required for full 
virulence (P < 0.005) in this model of infection. PerR of S. aureus may act as a 
redox sentinel protein during infection, analogous to the in vitro activities of 
OxyR and PerR of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, respectively. However,
it differs in its response to the metal balance within the cell and has the added
capability of regulating iron uptake and storage.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.6.3744-3754.2001 
PMCID: PMC98383
PMID: 11349039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arch Microbiol. 1997 Oct;168(4):328-37.

Two closely linked genes encoding thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase in
Clostridium litorale.

Kreimer S(1), Söhling B, Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle,
Kurt-Mothes-Strasse 3, D-06099 Halle, Germany.

The genes encoding thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase of Clostridium litorale 
were cloned and sequenced. The thioredoxin reductase gene (trxB) encoded a
protein of 33.9 kDa, and the deduced amino acid sequence showed 44% identity to
the corresponding protein from Escherichia coli. The gene encoding thioredoxin
(trxA) was located immediately downstream of trxB. TrxA and TrxB were each
encoded by two gene copies, both copies presumably located on the chromosome.
Like other thioredoxins from anaerobic, amino-acid-degrading bacteria
investigated to date by N-terminal amino acid sequencing, thioredoxin from C.
litorale exhibited characteristic deviations from the consensus sequence, e.g.,
GCVPC instead of WCGPC at the redox-active center. Using heterologous enzyme
assays, neither thioredoxin nor thioredoxin reductase were interchangeable with
the corresponding proteins of the thioredoxin system from E. coli. To elucidate
the molecular basis of that incompatibility, Gly-31 in C. litorale thioredoxin
was substituted with Trp (the W in the consensus sequence) by site-directed
mutagenesis. The mutant protein was expressed in E. coli and was purified to
homogeneity. Enzyme assays using the G31W thioredoxin revealed that Gly-31 was
not responsible for the observed incompatibility with the E. coli thioredoxin
reductase, but it was essential for activity of the thioredoxin system in C.
litorale.

DOI: 10.1007/s002030050506 
PMID: 9297471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Nov 15;234(1):192-9.

Glycine reductase of Clostridium litorale. Cloning, sequencing, and molecular
analysis of the grdAB operon that contains two in-frame TGA codons for selenium
incorporation.

Kreimer S(1), Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Germany.

A 2.8-kb HindIII fragment, containing three open reading frames, has been cloned 
and sequenced from Clostridium litorale. The first gene grdA encoded the
selenocysteine-containing protein PA of the glycine reductase complex, a protein 
of 159 amino acids with a deduced molecular mass of 16.7 kDa. The second gene
(grdB) encoded the 47-kDa subunit of the substrate-specific selenoprotein PB
glycine that is composed of 437 amino acids. The third gene contained the
5'-region of the gene for thioredoxin reductase, trxB. All gene products shared
high similarity with the corresponding proteins from Eubacterium acidaminophilum.
In both genes grdA and grdB, the opal termination codon (TGA) was found inframe, 
indicating the presence of selenocysteine in both polypeptides. Northern-blot
analysis showed that grdA and grdB are organized as one operon. Unlike
Escherichia coli, no stable secondary structures of the corresponding mRNA were
found immediately downstream of the UGA codons to direct an insertion of
selenocysteine into the grdA and grdB transcripts of C. litorale. Instead, a
secondary structure was identified in the 3'-untranslated region of grdB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.192_c.x 
PMID: 8529640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Res Microbiol. 1995 Feb;146(2):121-8.

Synthetic competition between cytoplasmic folding and translocation of a soluble 
membrane protein domain.

Uhland K(1), Zander T, Ehrmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Konstanz, Germany.

In wild-type strains of Escherichia coli, alkaline phosphatase (AP), either when 
present as a soluble protein or when fused to a membrane protein, is only active 
after translocation to the periplasm. In thioredoxin reductase (trxB) mutants,
however, cytoplasmically localized AP can form disulphide bonds and can reach an 
active conformation. Once it has folded in the cytoplasm, it can no longer be
translocated. On the other hand, when AP is fused to periplasmic domains of a
membrane protein, translocation can be more rapid than folding. Thus, expressing 
hybrids of AP and integral membrane proteins in a trxB mutant generates
competition between folding of AP in the cytoplasm and its translocation to the
periplasm. The cellular localization of AP can be monitored in phosphoserine
phosphatase (serB) mutants causing auxotrophy for L-serine. Cytoplasmically but
not periplasmically localized AP can compensate for the lack of SerB, leading to 
growth on indicator plates. As expected, when AP was fused to cytoplasmic domains
of membrane proteins, serB-mediated auxotrophy was abolished. Surprisingly, AP
fusions to periplasmic domains exhibited a non-uniform response pattern. Fusions 
that translocate AP rapidly did not complement the SerB defect, while those that 
export AP only slowly could do so. The usefulness of these strains for studying a
variety of aspects related to membrane protein biogenesis is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0923-2508(96)80890-4 
PMID: 7652206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Oct 15;217(2):791-8.

Components of glycine reductase from Eubacterium acidaminophilum. Cloning,
sequencing and identification of the genes for thioredoxin reductase, thioredoxin
and selenoprotein PA.

Lübbers M(1), Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Germany.

The genes encoding thioredoxin reductase (trxB), thioredoxin (trxA), protein PA
of glycine reductase (grdA) and the first 23 amino acids of the large subunit of 
protein PC of glycine reductase (grdC) belonging to the reductive deamination
systems present in Eubacterium acidaminophilum were cloned and sequenced. The
proteins were products of closely linked genes with 314 codons (thioredoxin
reductase), 110 codons (thioredoxin), and 158 codons (protein PA). The protein
previously called 'atypically small lipoamide dehydrogenase' or 'electron
transferring flavoprotein' could now conclusively be identified as a thioredoxin 
reductase (subunit mass of 34781 Da) by the alignment with the enzyme of
Escherichia coli showing the same typical order of the corresponding domains. The
thioredoxin (molecular mass of 11742 Da) deviated considerably from the known
consensus sequence, even in the most strongly conserved redox-active segment
WCGPC that was now GCVPC. The selenocysteine of protein PA (molecular mass of
16609 Da) was encoded by TGA. The protein was highly similar to those of
Clostridium purinolyticum and Clostridium sticklandii involved in glycine
reductase. Thioredoxin reductase and thioredoxin of E. acidaminophilum could be
successfully expressed in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb18307.x 
PMID: 8223622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (wza)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7013-20.

The RcsAB box. Characterization of a new operator essential for the regulation of
exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in enteric bacteria.

Wehland M(1), Bernhard F.

Author information: 
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Kristallographie, Takustrasse 6,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.

The interaction of the two transcriptional regulators RcsA and RcsB with a
specific operator is a common mechanism in the activation of capsule biosynthesis
in enteric bacteria. We describe RcsAB binding sites in the wza promoter of the
operon for colanic acid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli K-12, in the galF
promoter of the operon for K2 antigen biosynthesis in Klebsiella pneumoniae, and 
in the tviA (vipR) promoter of the operon for Vi antigen biosynthesis in
Salmonella typhi. We further show the interaction of RcsAB with the rcsA
promoters of various species, indicating that rcsA autoregulation also depends on
the presence of both proteins. The compilation of all identified RcsAB binding
sites revealed the conserved core sequence TaAGaatatTCctA, which we propose to be
termed RcsAB box. The RcsAB box is also part of Bordetella pertussis BvgA binding
sites and may represent a more distributed recognition motif within the LuxR
superfamily of transcriptional regulators. The RcsAB box is essential for the
induction of Rcs-regulated promoters. Site-specific mutations of conserved
nucleotides in the RcsAB boxes of the E. coli wza and rcsA promoters resulted in 
an exopolysaccharide-negative phenotype and in the reduction of reporter gene
expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7013 
PMID: 10702265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gadX) AND (deaD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Commun Biol. 2019 Jul 11;2:259. doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0509-0. eCollection 2019.

Forecasting cell fate during antibiotic exposure using stochastic gene
expression.

Rossi NA(#)(1)(2), El Meouche I(#)(2)(3), Dunlop MJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Molecular Biology, Cell Biology & Biochemistry Program, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215 USA.
(2)2Biological Design Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA.
(3)3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Commun Biol. 2019 Aug 30;2:330.
    Commun Biol. 2019 Aug 30;2(1):330.

Antibiotic killing does not occur at a single, precise time for all cells within 
a population. Variability in time to death can be caused by stochastic expression
of genes, resulting in differences in endogenous stress-resistance levels between
individual cells in a population. Here we investigate whether single-cell
differences in gene expression prior to antibiotic exposure are related to cell
survival times after antibiotic exposure for a range of genes of diverse
function. We quantified the time to death of single cells under antibiotic
exposure in combination with expression of reporters. For some reporters,
including genes involved in stress response and cellular processes like
metabolism, the time to cell death had a strong relationship with the initial
expression level of the genes. Our results highlight the single-cell level
non-uniformity of antibiotic killing and also provide examples of key genes where
cell-to-cell variation in expression is strongly linked to extended durations of 
antibiotic survival.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-019-0509-0 
PMCID: PMC6624276
PMID: 31312728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.


############# ((gadX) AND (rpoC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2017 May 31;83(12). pii: e00442-17. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00442-17. Print 2017 Jun 15.

Acid Evolution of Escherichia coli K-12 Eliminates Amino Acid Decarboxylases and 
Reregulates Catabolism.

He A(1), Penix SR(1), Basting PJ(1), Griffith JM(1), Creamer KE(1), Camperchioli 
D(1), Clark MW(1), Gonzales AS(1), Chávez Erazo JS(1), George NS(2), Bhagwat
AA(2), Slonczewski JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA.
(2)Environmental Microbiology and Food Safety Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA
slonczewski@kenyon.edu.

Acid-adapted strains of Escherichia coli K-12 W3110 were obtained by serial
culture in medium buffered at pH 4.6 (M. M. Harden, A. He, K. Creamer, M. W.
Clark, I. Hamdallah, K. A. Martinez, R. L. Kresslein, S. P. Bush, and J. L.
Slonczewski, Appl Environ Microbiol 81:1932-1941, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03494-14). Revised genomic analysis of these strains 
revealed insertion sequence (IS)-driven insertions and deletions that knocked out
regulators CadC (acid induction of lysine decarboxylase), GadX (acid induction of
glutamate decarboxylase), and FNR (anaerobic regulator). Each acid-evolved strain
showed loss of one or more amino acid decarboxylase systems, which normally help 
neutralize external acid (pH 5 to 6) and increase survival in extreme acid (pH
2). Strains from populations B11, H9, and F11 had an IS5 insertion or IS-mediated
deletion in cadC, while population B11 had a point mutation affecting the
arginine activator adiY The cadC and adiY mutants failed to neutralize acid in
the presence of exogenous lysine or arginine. In strain B11-1, reversion of an
rpoC (RNA polymerase) mutation partly restored arginine-dependent neutralization.
All eight strains showed deletion or downregulation of the Gad acid fitness
island. Strains with the Gad deletion lost the ability to produce GABA
(gamma-aminobutyric acid) and failed to survive extreme acid. Transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) of strain B11-1 showed upregulated genes for catabolism of
diverse substrates but downregulated acid stress genes (the biofilm regulator
ariR, yhiM, and Gad). Other strains showed downregulation of H2 consumption
mediated by hydrogenases (hya and hyb) which release acid. Strains F9-2 and F9-3 
had a deletion of fnr and showed downregulation of FNR-dependent genes (dmsABC,
frdABCD, hybABO, nikABCDE, and nrfAC). Overall, strains that had evolved in
buffered acid showed loss or downregulation of systems that neutralize unbuffered
acid and showed altered regulation of catabolism.IMPORTANCE Experimental
evolution of an enteric bacterium under a narrow buffered range of acid pH leads 
to loss of genes that enhance fitness above or below the buffered pH range,
including loss of enzymes that may raise external pH in the absence of buffer.
Prominent modes of evolutionary change involve IS-mediated insertions and
deletions that knock out key regulators. Over generations of acid stress,
catabolism undergoes reregulation in ways that differ for each evolving strain.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00442-17 
PMCID: PMC5452808
PMID: 28389540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (ascG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Biol Evol. 1992 Jul;9(4):688-706.

Nucleotide sequence, function, activation, and evolution of the cryptic asc
operon of Escherichia coli K12.

Hall BG(1), Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Rochester, New York 14627.

The cryptic asc (previous called "SAC") operon of Escherichia coli K12 has been
completely sequenced. It encodes a repressor (ascG); a PTS enzyme IIasc for the
transport of arbutin, salicin, and cellobiose (ascF); and a
phospho-beta-glucosidase that hydrolyzes the sugars which are phosphorylated
during transport (ascB). ascG and ascFB are transcribed from divergent promoters.
The cryptic operon is activated by the insertion of IS186 into the ascG
(repressor) gene. The ascFB genes are paralogous to the cryptic bglFB genes, and 
ascG is paralogous to galR. The duplications that gave rise to these paralogous
genes are estimated to have occurred approximately 320 Mya, a time that predates 
the divergence of E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040753 
PMID: 1630307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (purE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2001 Jun;147(Pt 6):1565-1573. doi:
10.1099/00221287-147-6-1565.

Genetic localization and regulation of the maltose phosphorylase gene, malP, in
Lactococcus lactis.

Nilsson U(1), Rådström P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Microbiology, Centre for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lund
Institute of Technology, Lund University, PO Box 124, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden1.

Maltose phosphorylase (MP) from Lactococcus lactis was purified and the
corresponding gene was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The isoelectric 
point of the pure enzyme was determined to be 7.0. According to zymogram analysis
and SDS-PAGE, the native MP was shown to be a monomeric enzyme with a molecular
mass of 75 kDa. A polyclonal antiserum was produced to assess the regulation of
the gene encoding MP in LC: lactis. According to immunoblot analysis, synthesis
of the enzyme was markedly repressed by both glucose and lactose in the growth
medium. When the lactococci were cultivated in the presence of other sugars,
including maltose, trehalose or galactose, there was a pronounced expression of
the MP gene. In addition, when the cells were grown in media without any added
sugar, there was also pronounced expression of the enzyme, according to
immunoblot analysis and specific activity data. These results indicated that no
particular sugar specifically induces the gene encoding MP. However, an effect of
glucose on MP expression was demonstrated by performing fermentations in the
presence of both maltose and glucose. When glucose was added to maltose-grown
lactococci in the mid-exponential growth phase, both the specific activity and
amount of MP per millilitre of cell extract decreased rapidly. The genetic locus 
for the MP gene was found to be in the vicinity of the region encoding a possible
regulator belonging to the LacI-GalR family of transcriptional regulators.
Furthermore, this genetic location was separated from the previously
characterized maltose-inducible and glucose-repressible beta-phosphoglucomutase
(beta-PGM) gene. The different genetic loci for the genes encoding MP and
beta-PGM explains the different gene regulation behaviour.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-147-6-1565 
PMID: 11390687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (purF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochemistry. 2002 Jan 15;41(2):511-20.

Role of residue 147 in the gene regulatory function of the Escherichia coli
purine repressor.

Huffman JL(1), Lu F, Zalkin H, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

The crystal structures of corepressor-bound and free Escherichia coli purine
repressor (PurR) have delineated the roles of several residues in corepressor
binding and specificity and the intramolecular signal transduction (allosterism) 
of this LacI/GalR family member. From these structures, residue W147 was
implicated as a key component of the allosteric response, but in many members of 
the LacI/GalR family, position 147 is occupied by an arginine. To understand the 
role of this tryptophan at position 147, three proteins, substituted by
phenylalanine (W147F), alanine (W147A), or arginine (W147R), were constructed and
characterized in vivo and in vitro, and their structures were determined. W147F
displays a decreased affinity for corepressor and is a poor repressor in vivo.
W147A and W147R, on the other hand, are super repressors and bind corepressor
13.6 and 7.9 times more tightly, respectively, than wild-type. Each mutant
PurR-hypoxanthine-purF operator holo complex crystallizes isomorphously to
wild-type. Whereas the apo corepressor binding domain (CBD) of W147F crystallizes
under those conditions used for the wild-type protein, neither the apo CBD of
W147R nor W147A crystallizes, although screened extensively for new crystal
forms. Structures of the holo repressor mutants have been solved to resolutions
between 2.5 and 2.9 A, and the structure of the apo CBD of W147F has been solved 
to 2.4 A resolution. These structures provide insight into the altered
biochemical properties and physiological functions of these mutants, which appear
to depend on the sometimes subtle preference for one conformation (apo vs holo)
over the other.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0156660 
PMID: 11781089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Mol Biol. 1999 Aug 13;291(2):347-61.

The role of lysine 55 in determining the specificity of the purine repressor for 
its operators through minor groove interactions.

Glasfeld A(1), Koehler AN, Schumacher MA, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR, 97201-3098, USA.

The interaction of the dimeric Escherichia coli purine repressor (PurR) with its 
cognate sequences leads to a 45 degrees to 50 degrees kink at a central CpG base 
step towards the major groove, as dyad-related leucine side-chains interdigitate 
between these bases from the minor groove. The resulting broadening of the minor 
groove increases the accessibility of the six central base-pairs towards minor
groove interactions with residues from PurR. It has been shown that lysine 55 of 
PurR makes a direct contact with the adenine base (Ade8) directly 5' to the
central CpG base-pair step in the high-affinity purF operator sequence. We have
investigated the importance of this interaction in the specificity and affinity
of wild-type PurR (WT) for its operators and we have studied a mutant of PurR in 
which Lys55 is replaced with alanine (K55A). Complexes of WT and K55A with duplex
DNA containing pur operator sequences varied at position 8 were investigated
crystallographically, and binding studies were performed using fluorescence
anisotropy. The structures of the protein-DNA complexes reveal a relatively
unperturbed global conformation regardless of the identity of the base-pair at
position 8 or residue 55. In all structures the combination of higher resolution 
and a palindromic purF operator site allowed several new PurR.DNA interactions to
be observed, including contacts by Thr15, Thr16 and His20. The side-chain of
Lys55 makes productive, though varying, interactions with the adenine, thymine or
cytosine base at position 8 that result in equilibrium dissociation constants of 
2.6 nM, 10 nM and 35 nM, respectively. However, the bulk of the lysine side-chain
apparently blocks high-affinity binding of operators with guanine at position 8
(Kd620 nM). Also, the high-affinity binding conformation appears blocked, as
crystals of WT bound to DNA with guanine at position 8 could not be grown. In
complexes containing K55A, the alanine side-chain is too far removed to engage in
van der Waals interactions with the operator, and, with the loss of the general
electrostatic interaction between the phosphate backbone and the ammonium group
of lysine, K55A binds each operator weakly. However, the mutation leads to a swap
of specificity of PurR for the base at position 8, with K55A exhibiting a twofold
preference for guanine over adenine. In addition to defining the role of Lys55 in
PurR minor groove binding, these studies provide structural insight into the
minor groove binding specificities of other LacI/GalR family members that have
either alanine (e.g. LacI, GalR, CcpA) or a basic residue (e.g. RafR, ScrR, RbtR)
at the comparable position.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2946 
PMID: 10438625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 25;263(36):19653-61.

Escherichia coli gene purR encoding a repressor protein for purine nucleotide
synthesis. Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and interaction with the purF operator.

Rolfes RJ(1), Zalkin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.

The Escherichia coli gene purR, encoding a repressor protein, was cloned by
complementation of a purR mutation. Gene purR on a multicopy plasmid repressed
expression of purF and purF-lacZ and reduced the growth rate of host cells by
limiting the rate of de novo purine nucleotide synthesis. The level of a
1.3-kilobase purR mRNA was higher in cells grown with excess adenine, suggesting 
that synthesis of the repressor may be regulated. The chromosomal locus of purR
was mapped to coordinate 1755-kb on the E. coli restriction map (Kohara, Y.,
Akiyama, K., and Isono, K. (1987) Cell 50, 495-508). Pur repressor bound
specifically to purF operator DNA as determined by gel retardation and DNase I
footprinting assays. The amino acid sequence of Pur repressor was derived from
the nucleotide sequence. Pur repressor subunit contains 341 amino acids and has a
calculated Mr of 38,179. Pur repressor is 31-35% identical with the galR and cytR
repressors and 26% identical with the lacI repressor. These four repressors are
likely homologous. Amino acid sequence similarity is greatest in an
amino-terminal region presumed to contain a DNA-binding domain. A similarity is
also noted in the operator sites for these repressors.


PMID: 3058704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gcvA) AND (ampC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 1995 Feb;141 ( Pt 2):419-30.

GcvA, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator protein, activates expression of the 
cloned Citrobacter freundii ampC beta-lactamase gene in Escherichia coli:
cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins.

Everett M(1), Walsh T, Guay G, Bennett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, UK.

Escherichia coli JRG582 is an ampD ampE deletion derivative of strain HfrH and
accordingly it is derepressed for expression of the cloned inducible
beta-lactamase gene of Citrobacter freundii, carried on plasmid pNU305. Following
chemical mutagenesis of JRG582(pNU305) a cefotaxime sensitive mutant was
isolated, CS51(pNU305), which produced low levels of beta-lactamase due to a
mutation in the host chromosome. Two recombinant plasmids containing genomic DNA 
from E. coli HfrH, namely pUB5608 and pUB5611, were isolated as a consequence of 
their ability to restore the beta-lactam resistant phenotype to CS51(pNU305).
This ability was due to direct transcriptional activation of the beta-lactamase
gene, ampC, rather than complementation of the CS51 mutation. Transposon
mutagenesis and subcloning showed that restoration of ampicillin resistance to
CS51(pNU305) was the function of a single gene, which maps at 60.3 min on the E. 
coli chromosome. The gene encodes a 33 kDa protein with significant homology to
members of the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, in particular the
AmpR protein from C. freundii. Homology is especially strong over the N-terminal 
region which includes the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. This gene was shown
to complement the gcvA1 mutation at 60.3 min on the E. coli chromosome, and the
DNA sequence agrees exactly with the published sequence of gcvA which encodes the
transcriptional activator of the inducible glycine cleavage enzyme system. It is 
suggested that GcvA can activate transcription of ampC by binding to the AmpR
binding region upstream of ampC so as to mimic the activated state of AmpR and
hence provides an example of cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins of different
inducible enzyme systems.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-141-2-419 
PMID: 7704273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gcvA) AND (ampD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 1995 Feb;141 ( Pt 2):419-30.

GcvA, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator protein, activates expression of the 
cloned Citrobacter freundii ampC beta-lactamase gene in Escherichia coli:
cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins.

Everett M(1), Walsh T, Guay G, Bennett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, UK.

Escherichia coli JRG582 is an ampD ampE deletion derivative of strain HfrH and
accordingly it is derepressed for expression of the cloned inducible
beta-lactamase gene of Citrobacter freundii, carried on plasmid pNU305. Following
chemical mutagenesis of JRG582(pNU305) a cefotaxime sensitive mutant was
isolated, CS51(pNU305), which produced low levels of beta-lactamase due to a
mutation in the host chromosome. Two recombinant plasmids containing genomic DNA 
from E. coli HfrH, namely pUB5608 and pUB5611, were isolated as a consequence of 
their ability to restore the beta-lactam resistant phenotype to CS51(pNU305).
This ability was due to direct transcriptional activation of the beta-lactamase
gene, ampC, rather than complementation of the CS51 mutation. Transposon
mutagenesis and subcloning showed that restoration of ampicillin resistance to
CS51(pNU305) was the function of a single gene, which maps at 60.3 min on the E. 
coli chromosome. The gene encodes a 33 kDa protein with significant homology to
members of the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, in particular the
AmpR protein from C. freundii. Homology is especially strong over the N-terminal 
region which includes the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. This gene was shown
to complement the gcvA1 mutation at 60.3 min on the E. coli chromosome, and the
DNA sequence agrees exactly with the published sequence of gcvA which encodes the
transcriptional activator of the inducible glycine cleavage enzyme system. It is 
suggested that GcvA can activate transcription of ampC by binding to the AmpR
binding region upstream of ampC so as to mimic the activated state of AmpR and
hence provides an example of cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins of different
inducible enzyme systems.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-141-2-419 
PMID: 7704273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((glmS) AND (glmS)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Agric Food Chem. 2021 Mar 31;69(12):3702-3711. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c00246.
Epub 2021 Mar 23.

Metabolic Engineering of Escherichia coli for Lacto-N-triose II Production with
High Productivity.

Zhu Y(1), Wan L(1), Meng J(1), Luo G(1), Chen G(1), Wu H(1), Zhang W(1), Mu
W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.
(2)International Joint Laboratory on Food Safety, Jiangnan University, Wuxi
214122, China.

Lacto-N-triose II (LNT II), a core structural unit of human milk oligosaccharides
(HMOs), has attracted substantial attention for its nutraceutical potentials and 
applications in the production of complex HMOs. In this study, Escherichia coli
was metabolically engineered to efficiently produce LNT II using glycerol as a
carbon source and lactose as a substrate. The UDP-N-acetylglucosamine
(UDP-GlcNAc) biosynthesis pathway was strengthened, and
β-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (LgtA) was introduced to construct an LNT
II-producing base strain. To increase the titer and yield of LNT II,
combinatorial optimization of the copy number and the ribosomal binding site
sequence was performed to tune the gene expression strength and translation rates
of the pathway enzymes. Next, multipoint mutations were introduced to
glucosamine-6-phosphatesynthase (GlmS) to relieve the feedback inhibition. Then, 
a series of engineered strains were constructed by blocking the futile pathways
by the deletion of the relevant genes. Finally, the culture conditions were
optimized. LNT II titer was improved step-by-step from 0.53 to 5.52 g/L in
shake-flask cultivations. Fed-batch culture of the final engineered strain
produced 46.2 g/L of LNT II, with an LNT II productivity and content of 0.77
g/(L·h) and 0.95 g/g dry cell weight, respectively.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c00246 
PMID: 33755468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Mol Cell Biol. 2021 Mar 16;22(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s12860-021-00357-7.

A cell-based ribozyme reporter system employing a chromosomally-integrated 5'
exonuclease gene.

Aroonsri A(1), Kongsee J(2), Gunawan JD(3), Aubry DA(3), Shaw PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
aiyada.aro@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
(3)School of Life Science, Indonesia International Institute for Life Sciences
(i3L), Jakarta, 13210, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: Bioinformatic genome surveys indicate that self-cleaving ribonucleic 
acids (ribozymes) appear to be widespread among all domains of life, although the
functions of only a small number have been validated by biochemical methods.
Alternatively, cell-based reporter gene assays can be used to validate ribozyme
function. However, reporter activity can be confounded by phenomena unrelated to 
ribozyme-mediated cleavage of RNA.
RESULTS: We established a ribozyme reporter system in Escherichia coli in which a
significant reduction of reporter activity is manifest when an active ribozyme
sequence is fused to the reporter gene and the expression of a foreign Bacillus
subtilis RNaseJ1 5' exonuclease is induced from a chromosomally-integrated gene
in the same cell.
CONCLUSIONS: The reporter system could be useful for validating ribozyme function
in candidate sequences identified from bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1186/s12860-021-00357-7 
PMCID: PMC7967978
PMID: 33726662 


3. mSphere. 2021 Mar 3;6(2). pii: e01286-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.01286-20.

A Spontaneous rapZ Mutant Impairs Infectivity of Lytic Bacteriophage vB_EcoM_JS09
against Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Zhou Y(1), Bao H(2), Zhang H(2), Pang M(2), Zhu S(2), Wang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Food
Quality and Safety, State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base, Ministry of Science
and Technology, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, China
ranwang@jaas.ac.cn zhouyan2007@jaas.ac.cn.
(2)Institute of Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Food
Quality and Safety, State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base, Ministry of Science
and Technology, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, China.

Our understanding of the mechanisms underlying phage-bacterium interactions
remains limited. In Escherichia coli, RapZ regulates glucosamine-6-phosphate
(GlcN6P) metabolism, the formation of which initiates synthesis of the bacterial 
cell envelope, including lipopolysaccharides (LPS). However, the role of RapZ, if
any, on phage infectivity remains to be investigated. Here, we isolated strains
of enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) resistant to its specific lytic bacteriophage
vB_EcoM_JS09 (JS09) in a phage aerosol spray experiment. Whole-genome analysis of
phage-resistant bacteria revealed the rapZ gene acquired a premature stop
mutation at amino acid 227. Here, we report that the mutation in the rapZ gene
confers resistance by inhibiting 93.5% phage adsorption. Furthermore, this
mutation changes the morphology of phage plaques, reduces efficiency of plating
and phage propagation efficiency, and impairs the infectivity of phage JS09
against ETEC. Using scanning electron microscopy assays, we attribute the
inability of the phage to adsorb to the loss of receptors in strains with
defective RapZ. Analysis of the LPS profile shows that strains with defective
RapZ inhibit phage infection by changing the LPS profile in E. coli Preincubation
of phage JS09 with LPS extracted from a wild-type (WT) strain blocked infection, 
suggesting LPS is the host receptor for phage JS09 adsorption. Our data uncover
the mechanism by which ETEC resists infection of phage JS09 by mutating the rapZ 
gene and then increasing the expression of glmS and changing the phage
receptor-LPS profile. These findings provide insight into the function of the
rapZ gene for efficient infection of phage JS09.IMPORTANCE The development of
phage-resistant bacteria is a challenging problem for phage therapy. However, our
knowledge of phage resistance mechanisms is still limited. RapZ is an RNase
adaptor protein encoded by the rapZ gene and plays an important function in
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Here, we report the whole-genome
analysis of a phage-resistant enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strain,
which revealed that the rapZ gene acquired a premature stop mutation (E227Stop). 
We show that the premature stop mutation of rapZ impairs the infectivity of phage
JS09 in ETEC. Furthermore, our findings indicate that ETEC becomes resistant
against the adsorption and infection of phage JS09 by mutating the rapZ gene,
increasing the expression of glmS, and changing the phage receptor-LPS profile.
It is also first reported here that RapZ is essential for efficient infection of 
phage JS09.

Copyright © 2021 Zhou et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.01286-20 
PMID: 33658278 


4. Mol Biotechnol. 2020 Aug;62(8):387-399. doi: 10.1007/s12033-020-00257-9. Epub
2020 Jun 23.

Enhancement of Production of D-Glucosamine in Escherichia coli by Blocking Three 
Pathways Involved in the Consumption of GlcN and GlcNAc.

Li P(1)(2), Li X(2), Wen Z(2), Dong R(2), Li K(2), Fan H(1)(2), Wang R(1)(2),
Wang J(3)(4), Lv M(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking (LBMP) (Qilu
University of Technology), Jinan, 250353, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Shandong Microbial Engineering, Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, 250353, Shandong, People's
Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking (LBMP) (Qilu
University of Technology), Jinan, 250353, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
wjqtt.6082@163.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Shandong Microbial Engineering, Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, 250353, Shandong, People's
Republic of China. wjqtt.6082@163.com.

D-Glucosamine is a commonly used dietary supplement that promotes cartilage
health in humans. Metabolic flux analysis showed that D-glucosamine production
could be increased by blocking three pathways involved in the consumption of
glucosamine-6-phosphate and acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate. By homologous
single-exchange, two key genes (nanE and murQ) of Escherichia coli BL21 were
knocked out, respectively. The D-glucosamine yields of the engineered strains E. 
coli BL21ΔmurQ and E. coli BL21ΔnanE represented increases by factors of 2.14 and
1.79, respectively. Meanwhile, for bifunctional gene glmU, we only knocked out
its glucosamine-1-phosphate acetyltransferase domain by 3D structural analysis to
keep the engineered strain E. coli BL21glmU-Δgpa survival, which resulted in an
increase in the production of D-glucosamine by a factor of 2.16. Moreover, for
further increasing D-glucosamine production, two genes encoding rate-limiting
enzymes, named glmS and gna1, were coexpressed by an RBS sequence in those
engineered strains. The total concentrations of D-glucosamine in E. coli BL21
glmU-Δgpa', E. coli BL21ΔmurQ', and E. coli BL21ΔnanE' were 2.65 g/L, 1.73 g/L,
and 1.38 g/L, which represented increases by factors of 8.83, 5.76, and 3.3,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-020-00257-9 
PMID: 32572810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microb Cell. 2020 Apr 15;7(5):139-142. doi: 10.15698/mic2020.05.717.

A multifunctional small RNA binding protein for sensing and signaling cell
envelope precursor availability in bacteria.

Khan MA(1), Görke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs,
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2020 Mar 16;39(6):e103848.

Synthesis of glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P) by the enzyme GlmS initiates
bacterial cell envelope biosynthesis. To ensure ongoing synthesis, GlcN6P
homeostasis is required. Escherichia coli achieves this through a
post-transcriptional control mechanism comprising the RNA-binding protein RapZ
and small RNAs (sRNAs) GlmY and GlmZ. GlmZ stimulates glmS translation by
base-pairing. When GlcN6P is abundant, GlmZ is cleaved and inactivated by
endoribonuclease RNase E. Cleavage depends on RapZ, which binds GlmZ and recruits
RNase E. Decreasing GlcN6P concentrations provoke up-regulation of the decoy sRNA
GlmY which sequesters RapZ, thereby suppressing GlmZ decay. In our current study 
we identify RapZ as the GlcN6P sensor. GlcN6P-free RapZ interacts with and
stimulates phosphorylation of the two-component system (TCS) QseE/QseF triggering
glmY expression. Thereby generated GlmY sequesters RapZ into stable complexes,
allowing for glmS expression. Sequestration by GlmY also disables RapZ to
stimulate QseE/QseF, providing a negative feed-back loop limiting the response.
When GlcN6P is replenished, GlmY is released from RapZ and rapidly degraded. Our 
work has revealed a complex regulatory scenario, in which an RNA binding protein 
senses a metabolite and communicates with two sRNAs, a TCS and ribonuclease RNase
E to achieve metabolite homeostasis.

Copyright: © 2020 Khan and Görke.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2020.05.717 
PMCID: PMC7199280
PMID: 32391395 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.


6. EMBO J. 2020 Mar 16;39(6):e103848. doi: 10.15252/embj.2019103848. Epub 2020 Feb
17.

Small RNA-binding protein RapZ mediates cell envelope precursor sensing and
signaling in Escherichia coli.

Khan MA(1), Durica-Mitic S(1), Göpel Y(1), Heermann R(2), Görke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs,
Vienna Biocenter (VBC), University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2020 Apr 15;7(5):139-142.

The RNA-binding protein RapZ cooperates with small RNAs (sRNAs) GlmY and GlmZ to 
regulate the glmS mRNA in Escherichia coli. Enzyme GlmS synthesizes
glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P), initiating cell envelope biosynthesis. GlmZ
activates glmS expression by base-pairing. When GlcN6P is ample, GlmZ is bound by
RapZ and degraded through ribonuclease recruitment. Upon GlcN6P depletion, the
decoy sRNA GlmY accumulates through a previously unknown mechanism and sequesters
RapZ, suppressing GlmZ decay. This circuit ensures GlcN6P homeostasis and thereby
envelope integrity. In this work, we identify RapZ as GlcN6P receptor.
GlcN6P-free RapZ stimulates phosphorylation of the two-component system QseE/QseF
by interaction, which in turn activates glmY expression. Elevated GlmY levels
sequester RapZ into stable complexes, which prevents GlmZ decay, promoting glmS
expression. Binding of GlmY also prevents RapZ from activating QseE/QseF,
generating a negative feedback loop limiting the response. When GlcN6P is
replenished, GlmY is released from RapZ and rapidly degraded. We reveal a
multifunctional sRNA-binding protein that dynamically engages into higher-order
complexes for metabolite signaling.

© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2019103848 
PMCID: PMC7073468
PMID: 32065419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2019 Nov 21;7:351. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00351.
eCollection 2019.

Metabolic Engineering of Escherichia coli for the Production of Hyaluronic Acid
From Glucose and Galactose.

Woo JE(1), Seong HJ(1), Lee SY(2), Jang YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry and Food Science Technology, Division of 
Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus Program), Institute of Agriculture & Life Science
(IALS), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, South Korea.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 Plus Program),
BioProcess Engineering Research Center, Center for Systems and Synthetic
Biotechnology, Institute for the BioCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea.

Hyaluronic acid is a glycosaminoglycan biopolymer widely present throughout
connective and epithelial tissue, and has been of great interest for medical and 
cosmetic applications. In the microbial production of hyaluronic acid, it has not
been established to utilize galactose enabling to be converted to UDP-glucuronic 
acid, which is a precursor for hyaluronic acid biosynthesis. In this study, we
engineered Escherichia coli to produce hyaluronic acid from glucose and
galactose. The galactose-utilizing Leloir pathway was activated by knocking out
the galR and galS genes encoding the transcriptional repressors. Also, the hasA
gene from Streptococcus zooepidemicus was introduced for the expression of
hyaluronic acid synthase. The consumption rates of glucose and galactose were
modulated by knockout of the pfkA and zwf genes, which encode
6-phosphofructokinase I and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, respectively.
Furthermore, the precursor biosynthesis pathway for hyaluronic acid production
was manipulated by separately overexpressing the gene clusters galU-ugd and
glmS-glmM-glmU, which enable the production of UDP-glucuronic acid and
UDP-N-acetyl-glucosamine, respectively. Batch culture of the final engineered
strain produced 29.98 mg/L of hyaluronic acid from glucose and galactose. As a
proof of concept, this study demonstrated the production of hyaluronic acid from 
glucose and galactose in the engineered E. coli.

Copyright © 2019 Woo, Seong, Lee and Jang.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00351 
PMCID: PMC6881274
PMID: 31824939 


8. RNA Biol. 2019 Aug;16(8):1055-1065. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2019.1612693. Epub 2019
May 22.

Feedback regulation of small RNA processing by the cleavage product.

Durica-Mitic S(1), Görke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max F. Perutz
Laboratories (MFPL) , University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC) , Vienna ,
Austria.

Many bacterial small RNAs (sRNAs) are processed resulting in variants with roles 
potentially distinct from the primary sRNAs. In Enterobacteriaceae sRNA GlmZ
activates expression of glmS by base-pairing when the levels of
glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P) are low. GlmS synthesizes GlcN6P, which is
required for cell envelope biosynthesis. When dispensable, GlmZ is cleaved by
RNase E in the base-pairing sequence. Processing requires protein RapZ, which
binds GlmZ and recruits RNase E by interaction. Cleavage is counteracted by the
homologous sRNA GlmY, which accumulates upon GlcN6P scarcity and sequesters RapZ.
Here, we report a novel role for a processed sRNA. We observed that processing of
GlmZ is never complete in vivo. Even upon RapZ overproduction, a fraction of GlmZ
remains full-length, while the 5' cleavage product (GlmZ*) accumulates. GlmZ*
retains all elements required for RapZ binding. Accordingly, GlmZ* can displace
full-length GlmZ from RapZ and counteract processing in vitro. To mimic GlmZ* in 
vivo, sRNA chimeras were employed consisting of foreign 3' ends including a
terminator fused to the 3' end of GlmZ*. In vitro, these chimeras perform
indistinguishable from GlmZ*. Expression of the chimeras in vivo inhibited
processing of endogenous GlmZ, causing moderate upregulation of GlmS synthesis.
Hence, accumulation of GlmZ* prevents complete GlmZ turnover. This mechanism may 
serve to adjust a robust glmS basal expression level that is buffered against
fluctuations in RapZ availability.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2019.1612693 
PMCID: PMC6602413
PMID: 31116083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2018 Jan 1;1072:130-135. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.11.015. Epub 2017 Nov 12.

First investigations for the characterization of glucosamine-6-phosphate synthase
by capillary electrophoresis.

Beneito-Cambra M(1), Gareil P(2), Badet B(3), Badet-Denisot MA(3), Delaunay N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Analytical and Bioanalytical Sciences and Miniaturization, UMR
CBI 8231, ESPCI Paris, PSL Research University, 10 rue Vauquelin, 75005 Paris,
France.
(2)Chimie ParisTech, Laboratory of Physicochemistry of Electrolytes, Colloids and
Analytical Sciences (PECSA), 75005 Paris, France.
(3)Centre de recherche de Gif, Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles,
CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.
(4)Laboratory of Analytical and Bioanalytical Sciences and Miniaturization, UMR
CBI 8231, ESPCI Paris, PSL Research University, 10 rue Vauquelin, 75005 Paris,
France; CNRS, UMR 8231, Paris, France. Electronic address:
nathalie.delaunay@espci.fr.

The enzyme glucosamine-6-phosphate synthase (GlmS) is an important point of
metabolic control in biosynthesis of amino sugar-containing macromolecules and is
therefore a potential target in order to design antibacterial and antifungal
drugs. It has two oligomerization states, which are the active dimer and the
inactive hexamer. For the first time, the potential of CE to separate and
quantify the two forms was studied. After incubating GlmS with the d-glucosamine 
6-phosphate (GlcN6P) inhibitor, an electrolyte based on sodium phosphate at pH
7.2 and an ionic strength of 100mM plus GlcN6P (either 2 or 20mM) allowed the
hexamer-dimer separation. However, the displacement of the dimer/hexamer
equilibrium during the analysis time prevented any improvement of the resolution 
when varying the effective separation length or the temperature of the analysis. 
Therefore, the use of a short-end CE method allowed the decrease in the analysis 
time to about 1min. Some parameters such as the temperature and the time of
incubation and the ratio of the inhibitor and enzyme concentrations were studied.
Then, it was also possible to test, very rapidly and with a very small amount,
some molecules having an inhibition potential for the GlmS enzyme
(arabinose-5-phosphate oxime, 2-amino-2-deoxy-d-glucitol 6-phosphate, and
glucose-6-phosphate).

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.11.015 
PMID: 29153997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Jan;106:763-767. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.08.073.
Epub 2017 Aug 14.

Identification of functional interactome of a key cell division regulatory
protein CedA of E.coli.

Sharma P(1), Tomar AK(1), Kundu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India.
(2)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India. Electronic address:
bkundu@bioschool.iitd.ac.in.

Cell division is compromised in DnaAcos mutant Escherichia coli cells that
results in filamentous cell morphology. This is countered by over-expression of
CedA protein that induces cytokinesis and thus, regular cell morphology is
regained; however via an unknown mechanism. To understand the process
systematically, exact role of CedA should be deciphered. Protein interactions are
crucial for functional organization of a cell and their identification helps in
revealing exact function(s) of a protein and its binding partners. Thus, this
study was intended to identify CedA binding proteins (CBPs) to gain more clues of
CedA function. We isolated CBPs by pull down assay using purified recombinant
CedA and identified nine CBPs by mass spectrometric analysis (MALDI-TOF MS and
LC-MS/MS), viz. PDHA1, RL2, DNAK, LPP, RPOB, G6PD, GLMS, RL3 and YBCJ. Based on
CBPs identified, we hypothesize that CedA plays a crucial and multifaceted role
in cell cycle regulation and specific pathways in which CedA participates may
include transcription and energy metabolism. However, further validation through 
in-vitro and in-vivo experiments is necessary. In conclusion, identification of
CBPs may help us in deciphering mechanism of CedA mediated cell division during
chromosomal DNA over-replication.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.08.073 
PMID: 28818726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((hupB) AND (hupB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 2;10(1):5802. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-62703-7.

Conditional down-regulation of GreA impacts expression of rRNA and transcription 
factors, affecting Mycobacterium smegmatis survival.

Jha RK(#)(1), Udupa S(#)(1), Rai AK(1), Rani P(1), Singh PR(1), Govind S(1),
Nagaraja V(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, 560 012, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, 560 012, India. vraj@iisc.ac.in.
(3)Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, 560 064, 
India. vraj@iisc.ac.in.
(#)Contributed equally

Gre, one of the conserved transcription factors in bacteria, modulates RNA
polymerase (RNAP) activity to ensure processivity and fidelity of RNA synthesis. 
Gre factors regulate transcription by inducing the intrinsic-endonucleolytic
activity of RNAP, allowing the enzyme to resume transcription from the paused and
arrested sites. While Escherichia coli and a number of eubacteria harbor GreA and
GreB, genus mycobacteria has a single Gre (GreA). To address the importance of
the GreA in growth, physiology and gene expression of Mycobacterium smegmatis, we
have constructed a conditional knock-down strain of GreA. The GreA depleted
strain exhibited slow growth, drastic changes in cell surface phenotype, cell
death, and increased susceptibility to front-line anti-tubercular drugs.
Transcripts and 2D-gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) analysis of the GreA conditional
knock-down strain showed altered expression of the genes involved in
transcription regulation. Among the genes analysed, expression of RNAP subunits
(β, β' and ω), carD, hupB, lsr2, and nusA were affected to a large extent. Severe
reduction in the expression of genes of rRNA operon in the knock-down strain
reveal a role for GreA in regulating the core components of the translation
process.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-62703-7 
PMCID: PMC7118132
PMID: 32242064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Plant Pathol. 2019 Apr;20(4):589-598. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12777. Epub 2019 Jan
11.

The histone-like protein HupB influences biofilm formation and virulence in
Xanthomonas citri ssp. citri through the regulation of flagellar biosynthesis.

Conforte VP(1), Malamud F(2), Yaryura PM(3), Toum Terrones L(4), Torres PS(1), De
Pino V(1), Chazarreta CN(1), Gudesblat GE(5), Castagnaro AP(4), R Marano M(6),
Vojnov AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Dr. César Milstein, Fundación Pablo Cassará,
CONICET, Saladillo 2468, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, C1440FFX, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas, Universidad Nacional de San
Martín, Campus Migueletes, 25 de Mayo y Francia, General San Martín, B1650HMN
Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones y Transferencia de Villa María CONICET, Universidad 
de Villa María, Carlos Pellegrini 211, Villa María, X5900FSE, Córdoba, Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Instituto de
Biodiversidad y Biología Experimental y Aplicada, CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias
Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Intendente Güiraldes 2160,
Buenos Aires, C1428EGA, Argentina.
(5)Instituto de Tecnología Agroindustrial del Noroeste Argentino (ITANOA),
Estación Experimental Agroindustrial Obispo Colombres (EEAOC), Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Av. William Cross 3150, Las 
Talitas, C.P. T4101XAC, Tucumán, Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario, Departamento de
Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad
Nacional de Rosario, Suipacha 531, Rosario, S2002LRK, Santa Fé, Argentina.

Citrus canker is an important disease of citrus, whose causal agent is the
bacterium Xanthomonas citri ssp. citri (Xcc). In previous studies, we found a
group of Xcc mutants, generated by the insertion of the Tn5 transposon, which
showed impaired ability to attach to an abiotic substrate. One of these mutants
carries the Tn5 insertion in hupB, a gene encoding a bacterial histone-like
protein, homologue to the β-subunit of the Heat-Unstable (HU) nucleoid protein of
Escherichia coli. These types of protein are necessary to maintain the bacterial 
nucleoid organization and the global regulation of gene expression. Here, we
characterized the influence of the mutation in hupB regarding Xcc biofilm
formation and virulence. The mutant strain hupB was incapable of swimming in soft
agar, whereas its complemented strain partially recovered this phenotype.
Electron microscope imaging revealed that impaired motility of hupB was a
consequence of the absence of the flagellum. Comparison of the expression of
flagellar genes between the wild-type strain and hupB showed that the mutant
exhibited decreased expression of fliC (encoding flagellin). The hupB mutant also
displayed reduced virulence compared with the wild-type strain when they were
used to infect Citrus lemon plants using different infection methods. Our results
therefore show that the histone-like protein HupB plays an essential role in the 
pathogenesis of Xcc through the regulation of biofilm formation and biosynthesis 
of the flagellum.

© 2018 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by BSPP and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12777 
PMCID: PMC6637892
PMID: 30537413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2018 Apr 24;200(10). pii: e00044-18. doi: 10.1128/JB.00044-18. Print
2018 May 15.

The Origin of Chromosomal Replication Is Asymmetrically Positioned on the
Mycobacterial Nucleoid, and the Timing of Its Firing Depends on HupB.

Hołówka J(1), Trojanowski D(2), Janczak M(2), Jakimowicz D(1)(2),
Zakrzewska-Czerwińska J(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Microorganisms, Hirszfeld Institute of
Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wrocław, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology, University of 
Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Microorganisms, Hirszfeld Institute of
Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wrocław, Poland 
jolanta.zakrzewska@uni.wroc.pl.

The bacterial chromosome undergoes dynamic changes in response to ongoing
cellular processes and adaptation to environmental conditions. Among the many
proteins involved in maintaining this dynamism, the most abundant is the
nucleoid-associated protein (NAP) HU. In mycobacteria, the HU homolog, HupB,
possesses an additional C-terminal domain that resembles that of eukaryotic
histones H1/H5. Recently, we demonstrated that the highly abundant HupB protein
occupies the entirety of the Mycobacterium smegmatis chromosome and that the
HupB-binding sites exhibit a bias from the origin (oriC) to the terminus (ter).
In this study, we used HupB fused with enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) 
to perform the first analysis of chromosome dynamics and to track the oriC and
replication machinery directly on the chromosome during the mycobacterial cell
cycle. We show that the chromosome is located in an off-center position that
reflects the unequal division and growth of mycobacterial cells. Moreover, unlike
the situation in E. coli, the sister oriC regions of M. smegmatis move
asymmetrically along the mycobacterial nucleoid. Interestingly, in this
slow-growing organism, the initiation of the next round of replication precedes
the physical separation of sister chromosomes. Finally, we show that HupB is
involved in the precise timing of replication initiation.IMPORTANCE Although our 
view of mycobacterial nucleoid organization has evolved considerably over time,
we still know little about the dynamics of the mycobacterial nucleoid during the 
cell cycle. HupB is a highly abundant mycobacterial nucleoid-associated protein
(NAP) with an indispensable histone-like tail. It was previously suggested as a
potential target for antibiotic therapy against tuberculosis. Here, we fused HupB
with enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) to study the dynamics of the
mycobacterial chromosome in real time and to monitor the replication process
directly on the chromosome. Our results reveal that, unlike the situation in
Escherichia coli, the nucleoid of an apically growing mycobacterium is positioned
asymmetrically within the cell throughout the cell cycle. We show that HupB is
involved in controlling the timing of replication initiation. Since tuberculosis 
remains a serious health problem, studies concerning mycobacterial cell biology
are of great importance.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00044-18 
PMCID: PMC5915789
PMID: 29531181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Jun;96(6):1119-35. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12994. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

DNABII proteins play a central role in UPEC biofilm structure.

Devaraj A(1), Justice SS(1), Bakaletz LO(1), Goodman SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH,
43205, USA.

Most chronic and recurrent bacterial infections involve a biofilm component, the 
foundation of which is the extracellular polymeric substance (EPS). Extracellular
DNA (eDNA) is a conserved and key component of the EPS of pathogenic biofilms.
The DNABII protein family includes integration host factor (IHF) and histone-like
protein (HU); both are present in the extracellular milieu. We have shown
previously that the DNABII proteins are often found in association with eDNA and 
are critical for the structural integrity of bacterial communities that utilize
eDNA as a matrix component. Here, we demonstrate that uropathogenic Escherichia
coli (UPEC) strain UTI89 incorporates eDNA within its biofilm matrix and that the
DNABII proteins are not only important for biofilm growth, but are limiting;
exogenous addition of these proteins promotes biofilm formation that is dependent
on eDNA. In addition, we show that both subunits of IHF, yet only one subunit of 
HU (HupB), are critical for UPEC biofilm development. We discuss the roles of
these proteins in context of the UPEC EPS.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12994 
PMCID: PMC4464964
PMID: 25757804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3524-37. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1236. Epub 2011
Dec 17.

Genomic analysis of DNA binding and gene regulation by homologous
nucleoid-associated proteins IHF and HU in Escherichia coli K12.

Prieto AI(1), Kahramanoglou C, Ali RM, Fraser GM, Seshasayee AS, Luscombe NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK.

IHF and HU are two heterodimeric nucleoid-associated proteins (NAP) that belong
to the same protein family but interact differently with the DNA. IHF is a
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that bends the DNA by over 160°. HU is the 
most conserved NAP, which binds non-specifically to duplex DNA with a particular 
preference for targeting nicked and bent DNA. Despite their importance, the in
vivo interactions of the two proteins to the DNA remain to be described at a high
resolution and on a genome-wide scale. Further, the effects of these proteins on 
gene expression on a global scale remain contentious. Finally, the contrast
between the functions of the homo- and heterodimeric forms of proteins deserves
the attention of further study. Here we present a genome-scale study of HU- and
IHF binding to the Escherichia coli K12 chromosome using ChIP-seq. We also
perform microarray analysis of gene expression in single- and double-deletion
mutants of each protein to identify their regulons. The sequence-specific binding
profile of IHF encompasses ∼30% of all operons, though the expression of <10% of 
these is affected by its deletion suggesting combinatorial control or a molecular
backup. The binding profile for HU is reflective of relatively non-specific
binding to the chromosome, however, with a preference for A/T-rich DNA. The HU
regulon comprises highly conserved genes including those that are essential and
possibly supercoiling sensitive. Finally, by performing ChIP-seq experiments,
where possible, of each subunit of IHF and HU in the absence of the other
subunit, we define genome-wide maps of DNA binding of the proteins in their
hetero- and homodimeric forms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr1236 
PMCID: PMC3333857
PMID: 22180530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEBS J. 2011 Sep;278(18):3447-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08267.x. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

Synergy between the N-terminal and C-terminal domains of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis HupB is essential for high-affinity binding, DNA supercoiling and
inhibition of RecA-promoted strand exchange.

Sharadamma N(1), Khan K, Kumar S, Patil KN, Hasnain SE, Muniyappa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

The occurrence of DNA architectural proteins containing two functional domains
derived from two different architectural proteins is an interesting emerging
research theme in the field of nucleoid structure and function. Mycobacterium
tuberculosis HupB, unlike Escherichia coli HU, is a two-domain protein that, in
the N-terminal region, shows broad sequence homology with bacterial HU. The long 
C-terminal extension, on the other hand, contains seven PAKK/KAAK motifs, which
are characteristic of the histone H1/H5 family of proteins. In this article, we
describe several aspects of HupB function, in comparison with its truncated
derivatives lacking either the C-terminus or N-terminus. We found that HupB binds
a variety of DNA repair and replication intermediates with K(d) values in the
nanomolar range. By contrast, the N-terminal fragment of M. tuberculosis HupB
(HupB(MtbN)) showed diminished DNA-binding activity, with K(d) values in the
micromolar range, and the C-terminal domain was completely devoid of DNA-binding 
activity. Unlike HupB(MtbN) , HupB was able to constrain DNA in negative
supercoils and introduce negative superhelical turns into relaxed DNA. Similarly,
HupB exerted a robust inhibitory effect on DNA strand exchange promoted by
cognate and noncognate RecA proteins, whereas HupB(MtbN), even at a 50-fold molar
excess, had no inhibitory effect. Considered together, these results suggest that
synergy between the N-terminal and C-terminal domains of HupB is essential for
its DNA-binding ability, and to modulate the topological features of DNA, which
has implications for processes such as DNA compaction, gene regulation,
homologous recombination, and DNA repair.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08267.x 
PMID: 21787377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19652-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200428. Epub 2011
Apr 7.

Structural and functional characterization of Rv2966c protein reveals an
RsmD-like methyltransferase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the role of its
N-terminal domain in target recognition.

Kumar A(1), Saigal K, Malhotra K, Sinha KM, Taneja B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research), Delhi, India.

Nine of ten methylated nucleotides of Escherichia coli 16 S rRNA are conserved in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. All the 10 different methyltransferases are known in 
E. coli, whereas only TlyA and GidB have been identified in mycobacteria. Here we
have identified Rv2966c of M. tuberculosis as an ortholog of RsmD protein of E.
coli. We have shown that rv2966c can complement rsmD-deleted E. coli cells.
Recombinant Rv2966c can use 30 S ribosomes purified from rsmD-deleted E. coli as 
substrate and methylate G966 of 16 S rRNA in vitro. Structure determination of
the protein shows the protein to be a two-domain structure with a short hairpin
domain at the N terminus and a C-terminal domain with the
S-adenosylmethionine-MT-fold. We show that the N-terminal hairpin is a minimalist
functional domain that helps Rv2966c in target recognition. Deletion of the
N-terminal domain prevents binding to nucleic acid substrates, and the truncated 
protein fails to carry out the m(2)G966 methylation on 16 S rRNA. The N-terminal 
domain also binds DNA efficiently, a property that may be utilized under specific
conditions of cellular growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200428 
PMCID: PMC3103344
PMID: 21474448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Methods Enzymol. 2011;488:287-335. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381268-1.00012-4.

Quantitative methods for measuring DNA flexibility in vitro and in vivo.

Peters JP(1), Becker NA, Rueter EM, Bajzer Z, Kahn JD, Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The double-helical DNA biopolymer is particularly resistant to bending and
twisting deformations. This property has important implications for DNA folding
in vitro and for the packaging and function of DNA in living cells. Among the
outstanding questions in the field of DNA biophysics are the underlying origin of
DNA stiffness and the mechanisms by which DNA stiffness is overcome within cells.
Exploring these questions requires experimental methods to quantitatively measure
DNA bending and twisting stiffness both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we discuss
two classical approaches: T4 DNA ligase-mediated DNA cyclization kinetics and lac
repressor-mediated DNA looping in Escherichia coli. We review the theoretical
basis for these techniques and how each can be applied to quantitate biophysical 
parameters that describe the DNA polymer. We then show how we have modified these
methods and applied them to quantitate how apparent DNA physical properties are
altered in vitro and in vivo by sequence-nonspecific architectural DNA-binding
proteins such as the E. coli HU protein and eukaryotic HMGB proteins.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381268-1.00012-4 
PMCID: PMC4190681
PMID: 21195233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 2;5(9). pii: e12551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012551.

DNA clasping by mycobacterial HU: the C-terminal region of HupB mediates
increased specificity of DNA binding.

Kumar S(1), Sardesai AA, Basu D, Muniyappa K, Hasnain SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: HU a small, basic, histone like protein is a major component of the
bacterial nucleoid. E. coli has two subunits of HU coded by hupA and hupB genes
whereas Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) has only one subunit of HU coded by ORF 
Rv2986c (hupB gene). One noticeable feature regarding Mtb HupB, based on sequence
alignment of HU orthologs from different bacteria, was that HupB(Mtb) bears at
its C-terminal end, a highly basic extension and this prompted an examination of 
its role in Mtb HupB function.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: With this objective two clones of Mtb HupB were
generated; one expressing full length HupB protein (HupB(Mtb)) and another which 
expresses only the N terminal region (first 95 amino acid) of hupB (HupB(MtbN)). 
Gel retardation assays revealed that HupB(MtbN) is almost like E. coli HU (heat
stable nucleoid protein) in terms of its DNA binding, with a binding constant
(K(d)) for linear dsDNA greater than 1000 nM, a value comparable to that obtained
for the HUalphaalpha and HUalphabeta forms. However CTR (C-terminal Region) of
HupB(Mtb) imparts greater specificity in DNA binding. HupB(Mtb) protein binds
more strongly to supercoiled plasmid DNA than to linear DNA, also this binding is
very stable as it provides DNase I protection even up to 5 minutes. Similar
results were obtained when the abilities of both proteins to mediate protection
against DNA strand cleavage by hydroxyl radicals generated by the Fenton's
reaction, were compared. It was also observed that both the proteins have DNA
binding preference for A:T rich DNA which may occur at the regulatory regions of 
ORFs and the oriC region of Mtb.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data thus point that HupB(Mtb) may participate in
chromosome organization in-vivo, it may also play a passive, possibly an
architectural role.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012551 
PMCID: PMC2932737
PMID: 20824060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. EMBO Rep. 2010 Jan;11(1):59-64. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.232. Epub 2009 Nov 13.

Coordination of genomic structure and transcription by the main bacterial
nucleoid-associated protein HU.

Berger M(1), Farcas A, Geertz M, Zhelyazkova P, Brix K, Travers A, Muskhelishvili
G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University, Campus Ring 1, D-28759
Bremen, Germany. m.berger@jacobs-university.de

The histone-like protein HU is a highly abundant DNA architectural protein that
is involved in compacting the DNA of the bacterial nucleoid and in regulating the
main DNA transactions, including gene transcription. However, the coordination of
the genomic structure and function by HU is poorly understood. Here, we address
this question by comparing transcript patterns and spatial distributions of RNA
polymerase in Escherichia coli wild-type and hupA/B mutant cells. We demonstrate 
that, in mutant cells, upregulated genes are preferentially clustered in a large 
chromosomal domain comprising the ribosomal RNA operons organized on both sides
of OriC. Furthermore, we show that, in parallel to this transcription asymmetry, 
mutant cells are also impaired in forming the transcription foci-spatially
confined aggregations of RNA polymerase molecules transcribing strong ribosomal
RNA operons. Our data thus implicate HU in coordinating the global genomic
structure and function by regulating the spatial distribution of RNA polymerase
in the nucleoid.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.232 
PMCID: PMC2816637
PMID: 20010798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ihfA) AND (ihfA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nat Commun. 2021 Aug 17;12(1):4976. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25243-w.

Genome-scale target identification in Escherichia coli for high-titer production 
of free fatty acids.

Fang L(1)(2), Fan J(1)(2), Luo S(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Cao Y(3)(4), 
Song H(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin),
School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China.
(3)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
caoyingxiu@tju.edu.cn.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin),
School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China. caoyingxiu@tju.edu.cn.
(5)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
hsong@tju.edu.cn.
(6)Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin),
School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China. hsong@tju.edu.cn.

To construct a superior microbial cell factory for chemical synthesis, a major
challenge is to fully exploit cellular potential by identifying and engineering
beneficial gene targets in sophisticated metabolic networks. Here, we take
advantage of CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) and omics analyses to systematically
identify beneficial genes that can be engineered to promote free fatty acids
(FFAs) production in Escherichia coli. CRISPRi-mediated genetic perturbation
enables the identification of 30 beneficial genes from 108 targets related to FFA
metabolism. Then, omics analyses of the FFAs-overproducing strains and a control 
strain enable the identification of another 26 beneficial genes that are
seemingly irrelevant to FFA metabolism. Combinatorial perturbation of four
beneficial genes involving cellular stress responses results in a recombinant
strain ihfAL--aidB+-ryfAM--gadAH-, producing 30.0 g L-1 FFAs in fed-batch
fermentation, the maximum titer in E. coli reported to date. Our findings are of 
help in rewiring cellular metabolism and interwoven intracellular processes to
facilitate high-titer production of biochemicals.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-25243-w 
PMCID: PMC8371096
PMID: 34404790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2021 Jan;118(1):43-57. doi: 10.1002/bit.27549. Epub 2020 Sep
18.

Regulatory interventions improve the biosynthesis of limiting amino acids from
methanol carbon to improve synthetic methylotrophy in Escherichia coli.

Kyle Bennett R(1)(2), Agee A(1)(2), Har JRG(1), von Hagel B(1)(2), Antoniewicz
MR(1), Papoutsakis ET(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware,
Newark, Delaware, USA.
(2)The Delaware Biotechnology Institute, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware, USA.

Synthetic methylotrophy aims to engineer methane and methanol utilization
pathways in platform hosts like Escherichia coli for industrial bioprocessing of 
natural gas and biogas. While recent attempts to engineer synthetic methylotrophs
have proved successful, autonomous methylotrophy, that is, the ability to utilize
methane or methanol as sole carbon and energy substrates, has not yet been
realized. Here, we address an important limitation of autonomous methylotrophy in
E. coli: the inability of the organism to synthesize several amino acids when
grown on methanol. We targeted global and local amino acid regulatory networks.
Those include removal of amino acid allosteric feedback inhibition (argAH15Y ,
ilvAL447F , hisGE271K , leuAG462D , proBD107N , thrAS345F , trpES40F ), knockouts
of transcriptional repressors (ihfA, metJ); and overexpression of amino acid
biosynthetic operons (hisGDCBHAFI, leuABCD, thrABC, trpEDCBA) and transcriptional
regulators (crp, purR). Compared to the parent methylotrophic E. coli strain that
was unable to synthesize these amino acids from methanol carbon, these strategies
resulted in improved biosynthesis of limiting proteinogenic amino acids
(histidine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tyrosine) from
methanol carbon. In several cases, improved amino acid biosynthesis from methanol
carbon led to improvements in methylotrophic growth in methanol minimal medium
supplemented with a small amount of yeast extract. This study addresses a key
limitation currently preventing autonomous methylotrophy in E. coli and possibly 
other synthetic methylotrophs and provides insight as to how this limitation can 
be alleviated via global and local regulatory modifications.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.27549 
PMID: 32876943 


3. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Aug 27;62(9). pii: e00806-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00806-18. Print 2018 Sep.

Genes and Proteins Involved in qnrS1 Induction.

Monárrez R(1), Wang Y(1), Fu Y(1)(2), Liao CH(1)(3), Okumura R(1)(4), Braun
MR(1), Jacoby GA(5), Hooper DC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Heilongjiang Provincial Key Laboratory for
Infection and Immunity, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(3)Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Biological Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA dhooper@mgh.harvard.edu.

Expression of the quinolone resistance gene qnrS1 is increased by quinolones, but
unlike induction of some other qnr genes, the bacterial SOS system is not
involved and no lexA box is found upstream. Nonetheless, at least 205 bp of
upstream sequence is required for induction to take place. An upstream sequence
bound to beads trapped potential binding proteins from cell extracts that were
identified by mass spectrometry as Dps, Fis, Ihf, Lrp, CysB, and YjhU. To further
elucidate their role, a reporter plasmid linking the qnrS1 upstream sequence to
lacZ was introduced into cells of the Keio collection with single-gene deletions 
and screened for lacZ expression. Mutants in ihfA and ihfB had decreased lacZ
induction, while induction in a cysB mutant was increased and dps, fis, lrp,
yjhU, and other mutants showed no change. The essential upstream sequence
contains potential binding sites for Ihf and DnaA. A dnaA deletion could not be
tested because it provides essential functions in cell replication; however,
increased dnaA expression decreased qnrS1 induction while decreased dnaA
expression enhanced it, implying a role for DnaA as a repressor. In a mobility
shift assay, purified IhfA, IhfB, and DnaA proteins (but not CysB) were shown to 
bind to the upstream segment. Induction decreased in a gyrA quinolone-resistant
mutant, indicating that GyrA also has a role. Thus, quinolones acting through
proteins DnaA, GyrA, IhfA, and IhfB regulate expression of qnrS1.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00806-18 
PMCID: PMC6125508
PMID: 29914953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arch Microbiol. 2018 Aug;200(6):979-987. doi: 10.1007/s00203-018-1518-y. Epub
2018 May 10.

Effect of global transcriptional regulators on kinetic behavior of Escherichia
coli under anaerobic fermentation conditions.

Kargeti M(1), Venkatesh KV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay,
Mumbai, 400076, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay,
Mumbai, 400076, India. venks@iitb.ac.in.

The phenotype of Escherichia coli is governed by global transcriptional
regulators under variable environmental conditions. Fnr, ArcA, IhfA-B, Crp, and
Fis are amongst the major global transcription regulators that change their
activity across the range of aeration, hence forming the core transcriptional
network responsible for survival under changing aeration conditions. Effect of
deletion of these global transcription factors on the kinetics of cell growth and
mixed acid production under anaerobic fermentation conditions has not been
characterized. To quantify the kinetic parameters in the absence of global
transcription factors, experiments were performed using single deletion mutants
of the above-mentioned global transcription regulators. The absence of global
transcription regulators resulted in a relatively higher glucose uptake rate than
that required for the observed growth rate. This further resulted in a higher
yield of mixed acids per unit biomass in mutants as compared to the parent strain
(E. coli BW25113). Thus, the increased channeling of carbon towards mixed acid
secretion resulted in a lower growth rate in the mutants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-018-1518-y 
PMID: 29748694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Biosyst. 2017 Jun 27;13(7):1388-1398. doi: 10.1039/c6mb00721j.

The effect of global transcriptional regulators on the anaerobic fermentative
metabolism of Escherichia coli.

Kargeti M(1), Venkatesh KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay,
Powai, Mumbai - 400076, India. venks@iitb.ac.in.

Global transcription factors are known to regulate the anaerobic growth of
Escherichia coli on glucose. These transcription factors help the organism to
sense oxygen and accordingly regulate the synthesis of mixed acid producing
enzymes. Five global transcription factors, namely ArcA, Fnr, IhfA-B, Crp and
Fis, are known to play an important role in the growth phenotype of the organism 
in the transition from anaerobic to aerobic conditions. The effect of deletion of
most of these global transcription factors on the growth phenotype has not been
characterized under strict anaerobic fermentation conditions. In order to
enumerate the role of global transcription factors in central carbon metabolism, 
experiments were performed using single deletion mutants of the above mentioned
global transcription regulators. The mutants demonstrated lower growth rates,
ranging from 3-75% lower growth as compared to the wild-type strain along with
varying glucose uptake rates. Global transcription regulators help in lowering
formate and acetate synthesis, thereby effectively channeling the carbon towards 
redox balance (through ethanol formation) and biomass synthesis. Flux analysis of
mutant strains indicated that deletion of a single transcription factor alone
does not play a significant role in the normalized flux distribution of the
central carbon metabolism.

DOI: 10.1039/c6mb00721j 
PMID: 28573283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2017 May 10;12(5):e0176290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176290.
eCollection 2017.

Novel genes associated with enhanced motility of Escherichia coli ST131.

Kakkanat A(1)(2), Phan MD(1)(2), Lo AW(1)(2), Beatson SA(1)(2)(3), Schembri
MA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) is the cause of ~75% of all urinary tract
infections (UTIs) and is increasingly associated with multidrug resistance. This 
includes UPEC strains from the recently emerged and globally disseminated
sequence type 131 (ST131), which is now the dominant fluoroquinolone-resistant
UPEC clone worldwide. Most ST131 strains are motile and produce H4-type flagella.
Here, we applied a combination of saturated Tn5 mutagenesis and transposon
directed insertion site sequencing (TraDIS) as a high throughput genetic screen
and identified 30 genes associated with enhanced motility of the reference ST131 
strain EC958. This included 12 genes that repress motility of E. coli K-12, four 
of which (lrhA, ihfA, ydiV, lrp) were confirmed in EC958. Other genes represented
novel factors that impact motility, and we focused our investigation on
characterisation of the mprA, hemK and yjeA genes. Mutation of each of these
genes in EC958 led to increased transcription of flagellar genes (flhD and fliC),
increased expression of the FliC flagellin, enhanced flagella synthesis and a
hyper-motile phenotype. Complementation restored all of these properties to
wild-type level. We also identified Tn5 insertions in several intergenic regions 
(IGRs) on the EC958 chromosome that were associated with enhanced motility; this 
included flhDC and EC958_1546. In both of these cases, the Tn5 insertions were
associated with increased transcription of the downstream gene(s), which resulted
in enhanced motility. The EC958_1546 gene encodes a phage protein with similarity
to esterase/deacetylase enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of sialic acid
derivatives found in human mucus. We showed that over-expression of EC958_1546
led to enhanced motility of EC958 as well as the UPEC strains CFT073 and UTI89,
demonstrating its activity affects the motility of different UPEC strains.
Overall, this study has identified and characterised a number of novel factors
associated with enhanced UPEC motility.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176290 
PMCID: PMC5425062
PMID: 28489862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2014 Apr;196(8):1597-607. doi: 10.1128/JB.00006-14. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

Differential transcriptional regulation of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans 
lsrACDBFG and lsrRK operons by integration host factor protein.

Torres-Escobar A(1), Juárez-Rodríguez MD, Demuth DR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group in Oral Health and Systemic Disease, University of Louisville
School of Dentistry, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

We previously showed that the Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans lsrACDBFG and
lsrRK operons are regulated by LsrR and cyclic AMP receptor protein (CRP) and
that proper regulation of the lsr locus is required for optimal biofilm growth by
A. actinomycetemcomitans. Here, we identified sequences that reside immediately
upstream from both the lsrA and lsrR start codons that closely resemble the
consensus recognition sequence of Escherichia coli integration host factor (IHF) 
protein. A. actinomycetemcomitans IHFα and IHFβ were expressed and purified as
hexahistidine fusion proteins, and using electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs), the IHFα-IHFβ protein complex was shown to bind to probes containing the
putative IHF recognition sequences. In addition, single-copy chromosomal
insertions of lsrR promoter-lacZ and lsrA promoter-lacZ transcriptional fusions
in wild-type A. actinomycetemcomitans and ΔihfA and ΔihfB mutant strains showed
that IHF differentially regulates the lsr locus and functions as a negative
regulator of lsrRK and a positive regulator of lsrACDBFG. Deletion of ihfA or
ihfB also reduced biofilm formation and altered biofilm architecture relative to 
the wild-type strain, and these phenotypes were partially complemented by a
plasmid-borne copy of ihfA or ihfB. Finally, using 5' rapid amplification of cDNA
ends (RACE), two transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and two putative promoters
were identified for lsrRK and three TSSs and putative promoters were identified
for lsrACDBFG. The function of the two lsrRK promoters and the positive
regulatory role of IHF in regulating lsrACDBFG expression were confirmed with a
series of lacZ transcriptional fusion constructs. Together, our results highlight
the complex transcriptional regulation of the lsrACDBFG and lsrRK operons and
suggest that multiple promoters and the architecture of the lsrACDBFG-lsrRK
intergenic region may control the expression of these operons.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00006-14 
PMCID: PMC3993359
PMID: 24532769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Mar 4;10(3):562-75. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70483a. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Steady state analysis of the genetic regulatory network incorporating underlying 
molecular mechanisms for anaerobic metabolism in Escherichia coli.

Srinivasan S(1), Venkatesh KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
Powai, Mumbai 400076, India. venks@iitb.ac.in.

A Gene Regulatory Network (GRN) represents complex connections between genes in a
cell which interact with each other through their RNA and protein expression
products, thereby determining the expression levels of mRNA and proteins required
for functioning of the cell. Microarray experiments yield the log fold change in 
mRNA abundance and quantify the expression levels for a GRN at the genome level. 
While Boolean or Bayesian modeling along with expression and location data are
useful in analyzing microarray data, they lack underlying mechanistic details
present in GRNs. Our objective is to understand the role of molecular mechanisms 
in quantifying a GRN. To that effect, we analyze under steady state, the complete
GRN for the central metabolic pathway during anaerobiosis in Escherichia coli. We
simulate the microarray experiments using a steady state gene expression
simulator (SSGES) that models molecular mechanistic details such as dimerization,
multiple-site binding, auto-regulation and feedback. Given a GRN, the SSGES
provided the log fold change in mRNA expression values as the output, which can
be compared to data from microarray experiments. We predict the log fold changes 
for mutants obtained by knocking out crucial transcriptional regulators such as
FNR (F), ArcA (A), IHFA-B (I) and DpiA (D) and observe a high degree of
correlation with previously reported experimental data. We also predict the
microarray expression values for hitherto unknown combinations of deletion
mutants. We hierarchically cluster the predicted log fold change values for these
mutants and postulate that E. coli has evolved from a predominantly lactate
secreting (FAID mutant) into a mixed acid secreting phenotype as seen in the wild
type (WT) during anaerobiosis. Upon simulating a model without incorporating the 
mechanistic details, not only the correlation with the experimental data reduced 
considerably, but also the clustering of expression data indicated WT to be
closer to the quadruple mutant FAID. This clearly demonstrates the significance
of incorporating mechanistic data while quantifying the expression profile of a
GRN which can help in predicting the effect of a gene mutant and understanding
the evolution of transcriptional control.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb70483a 
PMID: 24402032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(12):e1002846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002846. Epub
2012 Dec 20.

Nucleoid-associated proteins affect mutation dynamics in E. coli in a growth
phase-specific manner.

Warnecke T(1), Supek F, Lehner B.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Genomics Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona, Spain. Tobias.Warnecke@crg.es

The binding of proteins can shield DNA from mutagenic processes but also
interfere with efficient repair. How the presence of DNA-binding proteins shapes 
intra-genomic differences in mutability and, ultimately, sequence variation in
natural populations, however, remains poorly understood. In this study, we
examine sequence evolution in Escherichia coli in relation to the binding of four
abundant nucleoid-associated proteins: Fis, H-NS, IhfA, and IhfB. We find that,
for a subset of mutations, protein occupancy is associated with both increased
and decreased mutability in the underlying sequence depending on when the protein
is bound during the bacterial growth cycle. On average, protein-bound DNA
exhibits reduced mutability compared to protein-free DNA. However, this net
protective effect is weak and can be abolished or even reversed during stages of 
colony growth where binding coincides - and hence likely interferes with - DNA
repair activity. We suggest that the four nucleoid-associated proteins analyzed
here have played a minor but significant role in patterning extant sequence
variation in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002846 
PMCID: PMC3527292
PMID: 23284284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048349. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Aberrant community architecture and attenuated persistence of uropathogenic
Escherichia coli in the absence of individual IHF subunits.

Justice SS(1), Li B, Downey JS, Dabdoub SM, Brockson ME, Probst GD, Ray WC,
Goodman SD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
Sheryl.Justice@nationwidechildrens.org

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) utilizes a complex community-based
developmental pathway for growth within superficial epithelial cells of the
bladder during cystitis. Extracellular DNA (eDNA) is a common matrix component of
organized bacterial communities. Integration host factor (IHF) is a heterodimeric
protein that binds to double-stranded DNA and produces a hairpin bend.
IHF-dependent DNA architectural changes act both intrabacterially and
extrabacterially to regulate gene expression and community stability,
respectively. We demonstrate that both IHF subunits are required for efficient
colonization of the bladder, but are dispensable for early colonization of the
kidney. The community architecture of the intracellular bacterial communities
(IBCs) is quantitatively different in the absence of either IhfA or IhfB in the
murine model for human urinary tract infection (UTI). Restoration of Type 1 pili 
by ectopic production does not restore colonization in the absence of IhfA, but
partially compensates in the absence of IhfB. Furthermore, we describe a binding 
site for IHF that is upstream of the operon that encodes for the P-pilus. Taken
together, these data suggest that both IHF and its constituent subunits
(independent of the heterodimer), are able to participate in multiple aspects of 
the UPEC pathogenic lifestyle, and may have utility as a target for treatment of 
bacterial cystitis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048349 
PMCID: PMC3485042
PMID: 23133584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (fdx)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Feb;87(3):478-92. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12052. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Regulation of iron-sulphur cluster homeostasis through transcriptional control of
the Isc pathway by [2Fe-2S]-IscR in Escherichia coli.

Giel JL(1), Nesbit AD, Mettert EL, Fleischhacker AS, Wanta BT, Kiley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

Fe-S clusters are essential across the biological world, yet how cells regulate
expression of Fe-S cluster biogenesis pathways to cope with changes in Fe-S
cluster demand is not well understood. Here, we describe the mechanism by which
IscR, a [2Fe-2S] cluster-containing regulator of Escherichia coli, adjusts the
synthesis of the Isc Fe-S biogenesis pathway to maintain Fe-S homeostasis. Our
data indicate that a negative feedback loop operates to repress transcription of 
the iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx operon, encoding IscR and the Isc machinery, through
binding of [2Fe-2S]-IscR to two upstream binding sites. IscR was shown to require
primarily the Isc pathway for synthesis of its Fe-S cluster, providing a link
between IscR activity and demands for Fe-S clusters through the levels of the Isc
system. Surprisingly, the isc operon was more repressed under anaerobic
conditions, indicating increased Fe-S cluster occupancy of IscR and decreased
Fe-S cluster biogenesis demand relative to aerobic conditions. Consistent with
this notion, overexpression of a Fe-S protein under aerobic conditions, but not
under anaerobic conditions, led to derepression of P(iscR). Together, these data 
show how transcriptional control of iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx by [2Fe-2S]-IscR allows
E. coli to respond efficiently to varying Fe-S demands.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12052 
PMCID: PMC4108476
PMID: 23075318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 19;374(2):399-404. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.050. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Regulation of Escherichia coli IscS desulfurase activity by ferrous iron and
cysteine.

Wu G(1), Li P, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou
310058, China. wugenfu@zju.edu.cn

IscS plays a principal role in the synthesis of sulfur-containing biomolecules.
It is known that the expression of iscS can be negatively regulated by IscR, the 
first gene product of iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx. What governs the regulation of cysteine 
desulfurase activity, however, is unknown. Here, we report that IscS from
Escherichia coli is able to bind iron with an association constant of
1.6x10(17)M(-1) to form an IscS-iron complex. IscS is also capable of binding
both iron and sulfide to form an IscS-iron-sulfide complex with a higher
affinity. The desulfurase activity is gradually inhibited as the amount of iron
and sulfide bound to IscS increases. When 2Fe-2S binds IscS, about 20% of the
activity is inhibited; when 8Fe-8S adheres to IscS, about 70% of the activity is 
inhibited. Thus, the cell is able to modulate its desulfurase activity with the
formation of an IscS-iron-sulfide complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.050 
PMID: 18639525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 2006 May;60(4):1058-75.

IscR-dependent gene expression links iron-sulphur cluster assembly to the control
of O2-regulated genes in Escherichia coli.

Giel JL(1), Rodionov D, Liu M, Blattner FR, Kiley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, 
University of Winsconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

IscR is an iron-sulphur (Fe-S) cluster-containing transcription factor that
represses transcription of the operon containing its own gene and the
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx genes, whose products are involved in Fe-S cluster biogenesis.
In this study, global transcriptional profiling of Escherichia coli IscR(+) and
IscR(-) strains grown under aerobic and anaerobic conditions indicated that 40
genes in 20 predicted operons were regulated by IscR. DNase I footprinting and/or
in vitro transcription reactions identified seven new promoters under direct IscR
control. Among these were genes encoding known or proposed functions in Fe-S
cluster biogenesis (sufABCDSE, yadR and yhgI) and Fe-S cluster-containing
anaerobic respiratory enzymes (hyaABCDEF, hybOABCDEFG and napFDAGHBC). The
finding that IscR repressed expression of the hyaA, hybO and napF promoters
specifically under aerobic growth conditions suggests a new mechanism to explain 
their upregulation under anaerobic growth conditions. Phylogenetic footprinting
of the DNase I protected regions of seven promoters implies that there are at
least two different classes of IscR binding sites conserved among many bacteria. 
The findings presented here indicate a more general role of IscR in the
regulation of Fe-S cluster biogenesis and that IscR contributes to the O(2)
regulation of several promoters controlling the expression of anaerobic Fe-S
proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05160.x 
PMID: 16677314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biochem. 2004 Aug;136(2):199-209.

Interchangeability and distinct properties of bacterial Fe-S cluster assembly
systems: functional replacement of the isc and suf operons in Escherichia coli
with the nifSU-like operon from Helicobacter pylori.

Tokumoto U(1), Kitamura S, Fukuyama K, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka,
Osaka 560-0043.

The assembly of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, a key step in the post-translational
maturation of Fe-S proteins, is mediated by a complex apparatus. In E. coli, this
process involves two independent systems called ISC and SUF encoded by the
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx gene cluster and sufABCDSE operon, respectively. Another system,
termed NIF (nifSU), is required for the maturation of nitrogenase in
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. We have developed a novel genetic system to gain
further insight into these multi-component systems, and to determine how ISC, SUF
and NIF might differ in their roles in Fe-S assembly. We have constructed an E.
coli mutant lacking both the isc and suf operons, and this strain can only
survive in the presence of a complementing plasmid. Using the plasmid replacement
technique, we examined the isc and suf operons, and identified the genes
essential for the function. Additionally, we have found that nifSU-like genes
cloned from Helicobacter pylori are functionally exchangeable with the isc and
suf operons. Thus, the NIF-like system participates in the maturation of a wide
variety of Fe-S proteins. An increased ability of NIF to complement isc and suf
loss was seen under anaerobic conditions. This may explain why the NIF system is 
only found in a limited number of bacterial species, and most other organisms
prefer the ISC and/or SUF systems. While the differences between ISC and SUF were
small with respect to the complementing activity, the SUF system appears to be
more advantageous for bacterial growth in the presence of hydrogen peroxide.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvh104 
PMID: 15496591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (hscA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):14895-900. Epub 2001 Dec 11.

IscR, an Fe-S cluster-containing transcription factor, represses expression of
Escherichia coli genes encoding Fe-S cluster assembly proteins.

Schwartz CJ(1), Giel JL, Patschkowski T, Luther C, Ruzicka FJ, Beinert H, Kiley
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, 
and Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):14751-3.

IscR (iron-sulfur cluster regulator) is encoded by an ORF located immediately
upstream of genes coding for the Escherichia coli Fe-S cluster assembly proteins,
IscS, IscU, and IscA. IscR shares amino acid similarity with MarA, a member of
the MarA/SoxS/Rob family of transcription factors. In this study, we found that
IscR functions as a repressor of the iscRSUA operon, because strains deleted for 
iscR have increased expression of this operon. In addition, in vitro
transcription reactions established a direct role for IscR in repression of the
iscR promoter. Analysis of IscR by electron paramagnetic resonance showed that
the anaerobically isolated protein contains a [2Fe-2S](1+) cluster. The Fe-S
cluster appears to be important for IscR function, because repression of iscR
expression is significantly reduced in strains containing null mutations of the
Fe-S cluster assembly genes iscS or hscA. The finding that IscR activity is
decreased in strain backgrounds in which Fe-S cluster assembly is impaired
suggests that this protein may be part of a novel autoregulatory mechanism that
senses the Fe-S cluster assembly status of cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.251550898 
PMCID: PMC64955
PMID: 11742080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (hscB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (yeeE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Environ Microbiol. 2010 Oct;12(10):2846-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02265.x.

A genetic analysis of the response of Escherichia coli to cobalt stress.

Fantino JR(1), Py B, Fontecave M, Barras F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Bactérienne, CNRS UPR-9043, Institut de Microbiologie de
la Méditerranée, 31 Chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13009 Marseille, France.

Cobalt can be toxic and the way cells adapt to its presence is largely unknown.
Here we carried out a transcriptomic analysis of Escherichia coli exposed to
cobalt. A limited number of genes were either up- or downregulated. Upregulated
genes include the isc and the nfuA genes encoding Fe/S biogenesis assisting
factors, and the rcnA gene encoding a cobalt efflux system. Downregulated genes
are implicated in anaerobic metabolism (narK, nirB, hybO, grcA), metal transport 
(feoB, nikA), sulfate/thiosulfate import (cysP), and one is of unknown function
(yeeE). Cobalt regulation of isc, nfuA, hybO, cysP and yeeE genes was found to
involve IscR, a Fe/S transcriptional regulator. Previously, the Suf Fe/S
biogenesis machinery was found to be important for cobalt stress adaptation, but 
suf genes did not show up in the microarray analysis. Therefore, we used qRT-PCR 
analysis and found that cobalt induced the suf operon expression. Moreover,
kinetic analysis of the cobalt-mediated induction of the suf operon expression
allowed us to propose that cobalt toxicity is caused first by impaired Fe/S
biogenesis, followed by decreased iron bioavailability and eventually oxidative
stress.

© 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02265.x 
PMID: 20545747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (dnaE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mutat Res. 2002 Jan 29;499(1):85-95.

Sequence analysis and phenotypes of five temperature sensitive mutator alleles of
dnaE, encoding modified alpha-catalytic subunits of Escherichia coli DNA
polymerase III holoenzyme.

Vandewiele D(1), Fernández de Henestrosa AR, Timms AR, Bridges BA, Woodgate R.

Author information: 
(1)Section on DNA Replication, Repair and Mutagenesis, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2725, USA.

In the 1970s, several thermosensitive alleles of dnaE (encoding the
alpha-catalytic subunit of pol III) were isolated. Genetic characterization of
these dnaE mutants revealed that some are mutator alleles at permissive
temperature. We have determined the nucleotide changes of five such temperature
sensitive mutator alleles (dnaE9, dnaE74, dnaE486, dnaE511, and dnaE1026) and
find that most are single missense mutations. The exception is dnaE1026 which is 
a compound allele consisting of multiple missense mutations. When the previously 
characterized mutator alleles were moved into a lexA51(Def) recA730 strain,
dnaE486, dnaE1026 and dnaE74 conferred a modest approximately two-six-fold
increase in spontaneous mutagenesis when grown at the permissive temperature of
28 degrees C, while dnaE9 and dnaE511 actually resulted in a slight decrease in
spontaneous mutagenesis. In isogenic DeltaumuDC derivatives, the level of
spontaneous mutagenesis dropped significantly, although in each case, the overall
mutator effect conferred by the dnaE allele was relatively larger, with all five 
dnaE alleles conferring an increased spontaneous mutation rate approximately
5-22-fold over the isogenic dnaE+ DeltaumuDC strain. Interestingly, the
temperature sensitivity conferred by each allele varied considerably in the
lexA51(Def) recA730 background and in many cases, this phenotype was dependent
upon the presence of functional pol V (UmuD'2C). Our data suggest that pol V can 
compete effectively with the impaired alpha-subunit for a 3' primer terminus and 
as a result, a large proportion of the phenotypic effects observed with strains
carrying missense temperature sensitive mutations in dnaE can, in fact, be
attributed to the actions of pol V rather than pol III.

DOI: 10.1016/s0027-5107(01)00268-8 
PMID: 11804607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11627-32.

A universal protein-protein interaction motif in the eubacterial DNA replication 
and repair systems.

Dalrymple BP(1), Kongsuwan K, Wijffels G, Dixon NE, Jennings PA.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Livestock
Industries, 120 Meiers Road, Indooroopilly QLD 4068, Australia.

The interaction between DNA polymerases and sliding clamp proteins confers
processivity in DNA synthesis. This interaction is critical for most DNA
replication machines from viruses and prokaryotes to higher eukaryotes. The clamp
proteins also participate in a variety of dynamic and competing protein-protein
interactions. However, clamp-protein binding sequences have not so far been
identified in the eubacteria. Here we show from three lines of evidence,
bioinformatics, yeast two-hybrid analysis, and inhibition of protein-protein
interaction by modified peptides, that variants of a pentapeptide motif
(consensus QL[SD]LF) are sufficient to enable interaction of a number of proteins
with an archetypal eubacterial sliding clamp (the beta subunit of Escherichia
coli DNA polymerase III holoenzyme). Representatives of this motif are present in
most sequenced members of the eubacterial DnaE, PolC, PolB, DinB, and UmuC
families of DNA polymerases and the MutS1 mismatch repair protein family. The
component tripeptide DLF inhibits the binding of the alpha (DnaE) subunit of E.
coli DNA polymerase III to beta at microM concentration, identifying key
residues. Comparison of the eubacterial, eukaryotic, and archaeal sliding clamp
binding motifs suggests that the basic interactions have been conserved across
the evolutionary landscape.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.191384398 
PMCID: PMC58780
PMID: 11573000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2001 Oct;183(19):5496-505.

LuxArray, a high-density, genomewide transcription analysis of Escherichia coli
using bioluminescent reporter strains.

Van Dyk TK(1), DeRose EJ, Gonye GE.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development Department, DuPont Company, Wilmington,
Delaware 19880-0173, USA. Tina.K.Van-Dyk@usa.dupont.com

A sequenced collection of plasmid-borne random fusions of Escherichia coli DNA to
a Photorhabdus luminescens luxCDABE reporter was used as a starting point to
select a set of 689 nonredundant functional gene fusions. This group, called
LuxArray 1.0, represented 27% of the predicted transcriptional units in E. coli. 
High-density printing of the LuxArray 1.0 reporter strains to membranes on agar
plates was used for simultaneous reporter gene assays of gene expression. The
cellular response to nalidixic acid perturbation was analyzed using this format. 
As expected, fusions to promoters of LexA-controlled SOS-responsive genes dinG,
dinB, uvrA, and ydjM were found to be upregulated in the presence of nalidixic
acid. In addition, six fusions to genes not previously known to be induced by
nalidixic acid were also reproducibly upregulated. The responses of two of these,
fusions to oraA and yigN, were induced in a LexA-dependent manner by both
nalidixic acid and mitomycin C, identifying these as members of the LexA regulon.
The responses of the other four were neither induced by mitomycin C nor dependent
on lexA function. Thus, the promoters of ycgH, intG, rihC, and a putative operon 
consisting of lpxA, lpxB, rnhB, and dnaE were not generally DNA damage responsive
and represent a more specific response to nalidixic acid. These results
demonstrate that cellular arrays of reporter gene fusions are an important
alternative to DNA arrays for genomewide transcriptional analyses.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.19.5496-5505.2001 
PMCID: PMC95439
PMID: 11544210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15519-24.

Efficient translesion replication in the absence of Escherichia coli Umu proteins
and 3'-5' exonuclease proofreading function.

Vandewiele D(1), Borden A, O'Grady PI, Woodgate R, Lawrence CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section on DNA Replication, Repair and Mutagenesis, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2725, USA.

Translesion replication (TR) past a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer in Escherichia
coli normally requires the UmuD'2C complex, RecA protein, and DNA polymerase III 
holoenzyme (pol III). However, we find that efficient TR can occur in the absence
of the Umu proteins if the 3'-5' exonuclease proofreading activity of the pol III
epsilon-subunit also is disabled. TR was measured in isogenic uvrA6 DeltaumuDC
strains carrying the dominant negative dnaQ allele, mutD5, or DeltadnaQ spq-2
mutations by transfecting them with single-stranded M13-based vectors containing 
a specifically located cis-syn T-T dimer. As expected, little TR was observed in 
the DeltaumuDC dnaQ+ strain. Surprisingly, 26% TR occurred in UV-irradiated
DeltaumuDC mutD5 cells, one-half the frequency found in a uvrA6 umuDC+mutD5
strain. lexA3 (Ind-) derivatives of the strains showed that this TR was
contingent on two inducible functions, one LexA-dependent, responsible for
approximately 70% of the TR, and another LexA-independent, responsible for the
remaining approximately 30%. Curiously, the DeltaumuDC DeltadnaQ spq-2 strain
exhibited only the LexA-independent level of TR. The cause of this result appears
to be the spq-2 allele, a dnaE mutation required for viability in DeltadnaQ
strains, since introduction of spq-2 into the DeltaumuDC mutD5 strain also
reduces the frequency of TR to the LexA-independent level. The molecular
mechanism responsible for the LexA-independent TR is unknown but may be related
to the UVM phenomenon [Palejwala, V. A., Wang, G. E., Murphy, H. S. & Humayun, M.
Z. (1995) J. Bacteriol. 177, 6041-6048]. LexA-dependent TR does not result from
the induction of pol II, since TR in the DeltaumuDC mutD5 strain is unchanged by 
introduction of a DeltapolB mutation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15519 
PMCID: PMC28075
PMID: 9861001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genetics. 1997 Jun;146(2):457-70.

Enhanced deletion formation by aberrant DNA replication in Escherichia coli.

Saveson CJ(1), Lovett ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254-9110,
USA.

Repeated genes and sequences are prone to genetic rearrangements including
deletions. We have investigated deletion formation in Escherichia coli strains
mutant for various replication functions. Deletion was selected between 787 base 
pair tandem repeats carried either on a ColE1-derived plasmid or on the E. coli
chromosome. Only mutations in functions associated with DNA Polymerase III
elevated deletion rates in our assays. Especially large increases were observed
in strains mutant in dnaQ the epsilon editing subunit of Pol III, and dnaB, the
replication fork helicase. Mutations in several other functions also altered
deletion formation: the alpha polymerase (dnal;), the gamma clamp loader complex 
(holC, dnaX), and the beta clamp (dnaN) subunits of Pol III and the primosomal
proteins, dnaC and priA. Aberrant replication stimulated deletions through
several pathways. Whereas the elevation in dnaB strains was mostly recA- and
lexA-dependent, that in dnaQ strains was mostly recA- and lexA-independent.
Deletion product analysis suggested that slipped mispairing, producing monomeric 
replicon products, may be preferentially increased in a dnaQ mutant and
sister-strand exchange, producing dimeric replicon products, may be elevated in
dnaE mutants. We conclude that aberrant Polymerase III replication can stimulate 
deletion events through several mechanisms of deletion and via both
recA-dependent and independent pathways.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/146.2.457 
PMCID: PMC1207988
PMID: 9177997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mutat Res. 1987 Dec;181(2):219-26.

Current understanding of UV-induced base pair substitution mutation in E. coli
with particular reference to the DNA polymerase III complex.

Bridges BA(1), Woodgate R, Ruiz-Rubio M, Sharif F, Sedgwick SG, Hübscher U.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cell Mutation Unit, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Great Britain.

UV mutagenesis in E. coli is believed to occur in two discrete steps. The second 
step involves continued DNA synthesis beyond a blocking lesion in the template
strand. This bypass step requires induced levels of umuD and umuC gene products
and activated recA protein. DNA polymerase III may be involved since a dnaE
mutator strain (believed to have defective base selection) is associated with
enhanced UV mutagenesis in conjunction with a genetic background permitting the
bypass step. In non-UV-mutable umu and lexA strains, UV mutagenesis can be
demonstrated if delayed photoreversal is given. This is interpreted as indicating
that an earlier misincorporation step can occur in such strains but the resulting
mutations do not survive because the bypass step is blocked. The misincorporation
step does not require any induced SOS gene products and can occur either at the
replication fork or during repair replication following excision of a DNA lesion.
Neither a dnaE mutator gene (leading to a defective alpha subunit of DNA
polymerase III holoenzyme) nor a mutD5 mutator gene (leading to a defective
epsilon proofreading subunit) had any effect on the misincorporation step.
Although this is consistent with DNA polymerase III holoenzyme not being involved
in the misincorporation step, other interpretations involving the inhibition of
epsilon proofreading activity by recA protein are possible. In vitro studies are 
reported in which sites of termination of synthesis by DNA polymerase III
holoenzyme on UV-irradiated M13 mp8 DNA were examined in the presence of
inhibitors of the 3'-5' proofreading exonuclease (including recA protein). No
evidence was found for incorporation of bases opposite photoproducts suggesting
that either inhibition is more complete in the cell and/or that other factors are
involved in the misincorporation step.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(87)90099-6 
PMID: 3317025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1978 Nov;136(2):538-47.

Repair of cross-linked DNA and survival of Escherichia coli treated with psoralen
and light: effects of mutations influencing genetic recombination and DNA
metabolism.

Sinden RR, Cole RS.

Repair of cross-linked DNA was studied in Escherichia coli strains carrying
mutations affecting DNA metabolism. In wild-type cells, DNA strands cut during
cross-link removal were rejoined during a subsequent incubation into
high-molecular-weight molecules. This rejoining was dependent on gene products
involved in genetic recombination. A close correlation was found relating
recombination proficiency, the rate of strand rejoining, and formation of viable 
progeny after DNA cross-linking by treatment with psoralen and light. Wild-type
cells and other mutants which were Rec+ (sbcB, recL, recL sbcB, recB recC sbcA,
recB recC sbcB, xthA1, and xthA11) rejoined cut DNA strands at a rate of 0.8 +/- 
0.1 min -1 at 37 degrees C and survived 53 to 71 cross-links per chromosome.
recB, recC, recB recC, recF, or polA strains showed reduced rates of strand
rejoining and survived 4 to 13 cross-links per chromosome.
Recombination-deficient strains (recA, recB recC sbcB recF, recB recL) and lexA
failed to rejoin DNA strands after crosslink removal and were unable to form
colonies after treatments producing as few as one to two cross-links per
chromosome. Strand rejoining occurred normally in cells with mutations affecting 
DNA replication (dnaA, danB, dnaG, and dnaE) under both permissive and
nonpermissive conditions for chromosome replication. In a polA polB dnaE strain
strand rejoining occurred at 32 degree C but not at 42 degree C, indicating that 
some DNA synthesis was required for formation of intact recombinant molecules.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.136.2.538-547.1978 
PMCID: PMC218577
PMID: 361714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (hupB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 1991 May;173(9):2852-63.

Inhibition of cell division in hupA hupB mutant bacteria lacking HU protein.

Dri AM(1), Rouviere-Yaniv J, Moreau PL.

Author information: 
(1)Enzymologie, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France.

Escherichia coli hupA hypB double mutants that lack HU protein have severe
cellular defects in cell division, DNA folding, and DNA partitioning. Here we
show that the sfiA11 mutation, which alters the SfiA cell division inhibitor,
reduces filamentation and production of anucleate cells in AB1157 hupA hupB
strains. However, lexA3(Ind-) and sfiB(ftsZ)114 mutations, which normally
counteract the effect of the SfiA inhibitor, could not restore a normal
morphology to hupA hupB mutant bacteria. The LexA repressor, which controls the
expression of the sfiA gene, was present in hupA hupB mutant bacteria in
concentrations half of those of the parent bacteria, but this decrease was
independent of the specific cleavage of the LexA repressor by activated RecA
protein. One possibility to account for the filamentous morphology of hupA hupB
mutant bacteria is that the lack of HU protein alters the expression of specific 
genes, such as lexA and fts cell division genes.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.9.2852-2863.1991 
PMCID: PMC207866
PMID: 2019558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (ruvC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2021 Mar;296(2):437-456. doi: 10.1007/s00438-020-01760-z.
Epub 2021 Jan 28.

DNA recombination and repair in Wolbachia: RecA and related proteins.

Fallon AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Minnesota, 1980 Folwell Ave, St. Paul,
MN, 55108, USA. fallo002@umn.edu.

Wolbachia is an obligate intracellular bacterium that has undergone extensive
genomic streamlining in its arthropod and nematode hosts. Because the gene
encoding the bacterial DNA recombination/repair protein RecA is not essential in 
Escherichia coli, abundant expression of this protein in a mosquito cell line
persistently infected with Wolbachia strain wStri was unexpected. However, RecA's
role in the lytic cycle of bacteriophage lambda provides an explanation for
retention of recA in strains known to encode lambda-like WO prophages. To examine
DNA recombination/repair capacities in Wolbachia, a systematic examination of
RecA and related proteins in complete or nearly complete Wolbachia genomes from
supergroups A, B, C, D, E, F, J and S was undertaken. Genes encoding proteins
including RecA, RecF, RecO, RecR, RecG and Holliday junction resolvases RuvA,
RuvB and RuvC are uniformly absent from Wolbachia in supergroup C and have
reduced representation in supergroups D and J, suggesting that recombination and 
repair activities are compromised in nematode-associated Wolbachia, relative to
strains that infect arthropods. An exception is filarial Wolbachia strain wMhie, 
assigned to supergroup F, which occurs in a nematode host from a poikilothermic
lizard. Genes encoding LexA and error-prone polymerases are absent from all
Wolbachia genomes, suggesting that the SOS functions induced by RecA-mediated
activation of LexA do not occur, despite retention of genes encoding a few
proteins that respond to LexA induction in E. coli. Three independent E. coli
accessions converge on a single Wolbachia UvrD helicase, which interacts with
mismatch repair proteins MutS and MutL, encoded in nearly all Wolbachia genomes. 
With the exception of MutL, which has been mapped to a eukaryotic association
module in Phage WO, proteins involved in recombination/repair are uniformly
represented by single protein annotations. Putative phage-encoded MutL proteins
are restricted to Wolbachia supergroups A and B and show higher amino acid
identity than chromosomally encoded MutL orthologs. This analysis underscores
differences between nematode and arthropod-associated Wolbachia and describes
aspects of DNA metabolism that potentially impact development of procedures for
transformation and genetic manipulation of Wolbachia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-020-01760-z 
PMID: 33507381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Microbiol. 2016 Nov 9;7:1809. eCollection 2016.

Comparative Genomics of DNA Recombination and Repair in Cyanobacteria:
Biotechnological Implications.

Cassier-Chauvat C(1), Veaudor T(1), Chauvat F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell, CEA, Centre Nationnal de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Universite Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay
Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France.

Cyanobacteria are fascinating photosynthetic prokaryotes that are regarded as the
ancestors of the plant chloroplast; the purveyors of oxygen and biomass for the
food chain; and promising cell factories for an environmentally friendly
production of chemicals. In colonizing most waters and soils of our planet,
cyanobacteria are inevitably challenged by environmental stresses that generate
DNA damages. Furthermore, many strains engineered for biotechnological purposes
can use DNA recombination to stop synthesizing the biotechnological product.
Hence, it is important to study DNA recombination and repair in cyanobacteria for
both basic and applied research. This review reports what is known in a few
widely studied model cyanobacteria and what can be inferred by mining the
sequenced genomes of morphologically and physiologically diverse strains. We show
that cyanobacteria possess many E. coli-like DNA recombination and repair genes, 
and possibly other genes not yet identified. E. coli-homolog genes are unevenly
distributed in cyanobacteria, in agreement with their wide genome diversity. Many
genes are extremely well conserved in cyanobacteria (mutMS, radA, recA, recFO,
recG, recN, ruvABC, ssb, and uvrABCD), even in small genomes, suggesting that
they encode the core DNA repair process. In addition to these core genes, the
marine Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus strains harbor recBCD (DNA
recombination), umuCD (mutational DNA replication), as well as the key SOS genes 
lexA (regulation of the SOS system) and sulA (postponing of cell division until
completion of DNA reparation). Hence, these strains could possess an E. coli-type
SOS system. In contrast, several cyanobacteria endowed with larger genomes lack
typical SOS genes. For examples, the two studied Gloeobacter strains lack alkB,
lexA, and sulA; and Synechococcus PCC7942 has neither lexA nor recCD.
Furthermore, the Synechocystis PCC6803 lexA product does not regulate DNA repair 
genes. Collectively, these findings indicate that not all cyanobacteria have an
E. coli-type SOS system. Also interestingly, several cyanobacteria possess
multiple copies of E. coli-like DNA repair genes, such as Acaryochloris marina
MBIC11017 (2 alkB, 3 ogt, 7 recA, 3 recD, 2 ssb, 3 umuC, 4 umuD, and 8 xerC),
Cyanothece ATCC51142 (2 lexA and 4 ruvC), and Nostoc PCC7120 (2 ssb and 3 xerC).

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01809 
PMCID: PMC5101192
PMID: 27881980 


3. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Oct;58(1):80-101.

A role for topoisomerase III in a recombination pathway alternative to RuvABC.

Lopez CR(1), Yang S, Deibler RW, Ray SA, Pennington JM, Digate RJ, Hastings PJ,
Rosenberg SM, Zechiedrich EL.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The physiological role of topoisomerase III is unclear for any organism. We show 
here that the removal of topoisomerase III in temperature sensitive topoisomerase
IV mutants in Escherichia coli results in inviability at the permissive
temperature. The removal of topoisomerase III has no effect on the accumulation
of catenated intermediates of DNA replication, even when topoisomerase IV
activity is removed. Either recQ or recA null mutations, but not helD null or
lexA3, partially rescued the synthetic lethality of the double topoisomerase
III/IV mutant, indicating a role for topoisomerase III in recombination. We find 
a bias against deleting the gene encoding topoisomerase III in ruvC53 or
DeltaruvABC backgrounds compared with the isogenic wild-type strains. The
topoisomerase III RuvC double mutants that can be constructed are five- to
10-fold more sensitive to UV irradiation and mitomycin C treatment and are
twofold less efficient in transduction efficiency than ruvC53 mutants. The
overexpression of ruvABC allows the construction of the topoisomerase III/IV
double mutant. These data are consistent with a role for topoisomerase III in
disentangling recombination intermediates as an alternative to RuvABC to maintain
the stability of the genome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04812.x 
PMID: 16164551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Biol. 2002 Jan 25;315(4):513-27.

Mistranslation induced by streptomycin provokes a RecABC/RuvABC-dependent mutator
phenotype in Escherichia coli cells.

Balashov S(1), Humayun MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ - New Jersey Medical 
School, 185 South Orange Avenue, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Translational stress-induced mutagenesis (TSM) refers to the mutator phenotype
observed in Escherichia coli cells expressing a mutant allele (mutA or mutC) of
the glycine tRNA gene glyV (or glyW). Because of an anticodon mutation,
expression of the mutA allele results in low levels of Asp-->Gly mistranslation. 
The mutA phenotype does not require lexA-regulated SOS mutagenesis functions, and
appears to be suppressed in cells defective for RecABC-dependent homologous
recombination functions. To test the hypothesis that the TSM response is mediated
by non-specific mistranslation rather than specific Asp-->Gly misreading, we
asked if streptomycin (Str), an aminoglycoside antibiotic known to promote
mistranslation, can provoke a mutator phenotype. We report that Str induces a
strong mutator phenotype in cells bearing certain alleles of rpsL, the gene
encoding S12, an essential component of the ribosomal 30 S subunit. The phenotype
is strikingly similar to that observed in mutA cells in its mutational
specificity, as well as in its requirement for RecABC-mediated homologous
recombination functions. Expression of Str-inducible mutator phenotype correlates
with mistranslation efficiency in response to Str. Thus, mistranslation in
general is able to induce the TSM response. The Str-inducible mutator phenotype
described here defines a new functional class of rpsL alleles, and raises
interesting questions on the mechanism of action of Str, and on bacterial
response to antibiotic stress.

Copyright 2002 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.5273 
PMID: 11812126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(15):4459-67.

Identification of some DNA damage-inducible genes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: 
apparent lack of correlation with LexA binding.

Brooks PC(1), Movahedzadeh F, Davis EO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mycobacterial Research, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, England.

The repair of DNA damage is expected to be particularly important to
intracellular pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and so it is of
interest to examine the response of M. tuberculosis to DNA damage. The expression
of recA, a key component in DNA repair and recombination, is induced by DNA
damage in M. tuberculosis. In this study, we have analyzed the expression
following DNA damage in M. tuberculosis of a number of other genes which are DNA 
damage inducible in Escherichia coli. While many of these genes were also induced
by DNA damage in M. tuberculosis, some were not. In addition, one gene (ruvC)
which is not induced by DNA damage in E. coli was induced in M. tuberculosis, a
result likely linked to its different transcriptional arrangement in M.
tuberculosis. We also searched the sequences upstream of the genes being studied 
for the mycobacterial SOS box (the binding site for LexA) and assessed LexA
binding to potential sites identified. LexA is the repressor protein responsible 
for regulating expression of these SOS genes in E. coli. However, two of the
genes which were DNA damage inducible in M. tuberculosis did not have
identifiable sites to which LexA bound. The absence of binding sites for LexA
upstream of these genes was confirmed by analysis of LexA binding to overlapping 
DNA fragments covering a region from 500 bp upstream of the coding sequence to
100 bp within it. Therefore, it appears most likely that an alternative mechanism
of gene regulation in response to DNA damage exists in M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.15.4459-4467.2001 
PMCID: PMC95339
PMID: 11443079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jan;182(2):463-8.

Recombination is essential for viability of an Escherichia coli dam (DNA adenine 
methyltransferase) mutant.

Marinus MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA. martin.marinus@umassmed.edu

Double mutants of Escherichia coli dam (DNA adenine methyltransferase) strains
with ruvA, ruvB, or ruvC could not be constructed, whereas dam derivatives with
recD, recF, recJ, and recR were viable. The ruv gene products are required for
Holliday junction translocation and resolution of recombination intermediates. A 
dam recG (Holliday junction translocation) mutant strain was isolated but at a
very much lower frequency than expected. The inviability of a dam lexA (Ind(-))
host was abrogated by the simultaneous presence of plasmids encoding both recA
and ruvAB. This result indicates that of more than 20 SOS genes, only recA and
ruvAB need to be derepressed to allow for dam mutant survival. The presence of
mutS or mutL mutations allowed the construction of dam lexA (Ind(-)) derivatives.
The requirement for recA, recB, recC, ruvA, ruvB, ruvC, and possibly recG gene
expression indicates that recombination is essential for viability of dam
bacteria probably to repair DNA double-strand breaks. The effect of mutS and mutL
mutations indicates that DNA mismatch repair is the ultimate source of most of
these DNA breaks. The requirement for recombination also suggests an explanation 
for the sensitivity of dam cells to certain DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.2.463-468.2000 
PMCID: PMC94297
PMID: 10629194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mutat Res. 1996 Apr 2;362(3):219-26.

The ultraviolet-sensitizing function of plasmid R391 interferes with a late step 
of postreplication repair in Escherichia coli.

Wang TC(1), de Saint Phalle B, Millman KL, Fowler RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Chang Gung College of Medicine and
Technology, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

The conjugative plasmid R391 increases the UV radiation sensitivity of wild-type,
uvrA, and lexA cells of Escherichia coli, but not recA strains. To investigate
the UV-sensitizing function of R391, we examined the effect of R391 on the repair
of DNA daughter-strand gaps and on the UV radiation sensitivities of various
repair and/or recombination-deficient mutants. The presence of R391 did not
significantly inhibit the repair of DNA daughter-strand gaps in uvrB cells. The
presence of R391 increased the UV radiation sensitivity of uvrA, uvrA recF, uvrB,
uvrB recF, uvrB recB, and uvrB ssb-113 cells to UV irradiation, but did not
significantly increase the UV radiation sensitivity of uvrA ruvA and uvrA ruvC
strains. Based on these results, we propose that the UV-sensitizing activity of
R391 acts by inhibiting or interfering with the ruvABC-mediated postsynapsis step
of recombinational repair.

DOI: 10.1016/0921-8777(95)00044-5 
PMID: 8637500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1992 Oct;2(5):683-90.

Genetic analysis of recombination in prokaryotes.

Lloyd RG(1), Sharples GJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, UK.

Bacteria provide a simple system for the genetic analysis of homologous
recombination. More than twenty genes have been identified in Escherichia coli.
The enzymatic activities associated with the products of many of these genes have
been revealed by studies with model DNA substrates. It is now possible to pair
homologous molecules in vitro and process these through defined intermediates
into mature recombinants of the types predicted by genetic crosses.

DOI: 10.1016/s0959-437x(05)80127-3 
PMID: 1458021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 1991 Dec;173(23):7711-5.

Resolution of Holliday junctions in Escherichia coli: identification of the ruvC 
gene product as a 19-kilodalton protein.

Sharples GJ(1), Lloyd RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre,
United Kingdom.

The ruvC gene of Escherichia coli specifies a nuclease that resolves Holliday
junction intermediates in genetic recombination (B. Connolly, C.A. Parsons, F.E. 
Benson, H.J. Dunderdale, G.J. Sharples, R.G. Lloyd, and S.C. West, Proc. Natl.
Acad, Sci. USA 88:6063-6067, 1991). The gene was located between aspS and the
ruvAB operon by DNA sequencing and deletion analysis of ruvC plasmids and was
shown to encode a protein of 18,747 Da. Analysis of the DNA flanking ruvC
indicated that the gene is transcribed independently of the LexA-regulated ruvAB 
operon and is not under direct SOS control. ruvC lies downstream of an open
reading frame, orf-33, for a protein which migrates during sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as a 33-kDa polypeptide. These two
genes probably form an operon. However, expression of ruvC was found to be very
poor relative to that of orf-33. A double ribosomal frameshift between these
genes is proposed as a possible reason for the low level of RuvC. Two further
open reading frames of unknown function were identified, one on either side of
the orf-33-ruvC operon.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.23.7711-7715.1991 
PMCID: PMC212543
PMID: 1657895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (sbcD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Arch Microbiol. 2009 Feb;191(2):185-90. doi: 10.1007/s00203-008-0441-z. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

Role of single-strand DNA 3'-5' exonuclease ExoI and nuclease SbcCD in
stationary-phase mutation in Escherichia coli K-12.

Ramírez-Santos J(1), García-Mata V, Poggio S, Camarena L, Gómez-Eichelmann MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, P.O. Box
70-228, 04510 Mexico, D.F., Mexico.

In RecBCD(+) cells, a mutated single-strand DNA 3'-5' exonuclease ExoI (SbcB15)
induced an increase in stationary-phase mutation. In sbcB15 cells, as in
wild-type cells, these mutations partially required RecA, RecB, RecF, and
expression of the LexA regulon. The absence of nuclease SbcCD in sbcB15 cells
decreased stationary-phase mutation and induced an increase in the number of cell
filaments. The absence of ExoI (Deltaxon) in wild-type or sbcC cells did not
change significantly the stationary-phase mutation. Differences between the
sbcB15 and DeltaxonA cells suggest a correlation between level of SOS induction
and the generation of stationary-phase mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-008-0441-z 
PMID: 19018518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mutat Res. 1999 Dec 7;435(3):171-213.

A phylogenomic study of DNA repair genes, proteins, and processes.

Eisen JA(1), Hanawalt PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-5020, USA. jeisen@tigr.org

The ability to recognize and repair abnormal DNA structures is common to all
forms of life. Studies in a variety of species have identified an incredible
diversity of DNA repair pathways. Documenting and characterizing the similarities
and differences in repair between species has important value for understanding
the origin and evolution of repair pathways as well as for improving our
understanding of phenotypes affected by repair (e.g., mutation rates, lifespan,
tumorigenesis, survival in extreme environments). Unfortunately, while repair
processes have been studied in quite a few species, the ecological and
evolutionary diversity of such studies has been limited. Complete genome
sequences can provide potential sources of new information about repair in
different species. In this paper, we present a global comparative analysis of DNA
repair proteins and processes based upon the analysis of available complete
genome sequences. We use a new form of analysis that combines genome sequence
information and phylogenetic studies into a composite analysis we refer to as
phylogenomics. We use this phylogenomic analysis to study the evolution of repair
proteins and processes and to predict the repair phenotypes of those species for 
which we now know the complete genome sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0921-8777(99)00050-6 
PMCID: PMC3158673
PMID: 10606811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lon) AND (lon)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS One. 2021 Sep 15;16(9):e0257257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257257.
eCollection 2021.

Essential roles of Lon protease in the morpho-physiological traits of the rice
pathogen Burkholderia glumae.

Goo E(1)(2), Hwang I(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Research Institute of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The highly conserved ATP-dependent Lon protease plays important roles in diverse 
biological processes. The lon gene is usually nonessential for viability;
however, lon mutants of several bacterial species, although viable, exhibit
cellular defects. Here, we show that a lack of Lon protease causes pleiotropic
effects in the rice pathogen Burkholderia glumae. The null mutation of lon
produced three colony types, big (BLONB), normal (BLONN), and small (BLONS), in
Luria-Bertani (LB) medium. Colonies of the BLONB and BLONN types were
re-segregated upon subculture, while those of the BLONS type were too small to
manipulate. The BLONN type was chosen for further studies, as only this type was 
fully genetically complemented. BLONN-type cells did not reach the maximum growth
capacity, and their population decreased drastically after the stationary phase
in LB medium. BLONN-type cells were defective in the biosynthesis of quorum
sensing (QS) signals and exhibited reduced oxalate biosynthetic activity, causing
environmental alkaline toxicity and population collapse. Addition of excessive
N-octanoyl-homoserine lactone (C8-HSL) to BLONN-type cell cultures did not fully 
restore oxalate biosynthesis, suggesting that the decrease in oxalate
biosynthesis in BLONN-type cells was not due to insufficient C8-HSL.
Co-expression of lon and tofR in Escherichia coli suggested that Lon negatively
affects the TofR level in a C8-HSL-dependent manner. Lon protease interacted with
the oxalate biosynthetic enzymes, ObcA and ObcB, indicating potential roles for
the oxalate biosynthetic activity. These results suggest that Lon protease
influences colony morphology, growth, QS system, and oxalate biosynthesis in B.
glumae.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257257 
PMCID: PMC8443046
PMID: 34525127 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


2. J Bacteriol. 2021 Jun 22;203(14):e0014321. doi: 10.1128/JB.00143-21. Epub 2021
Jun 22.

Low Cytoplasmic Magnesium Increases the Specificity of the Lon and ClpAP
Proteases.

Yeom J(1)(2)(3), Groisman EA(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Yale Microbial Sciences Institute, West Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Proteolysis is a fundamental property of all living cells. In the bacterium
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, the HspQ protein controls the
specificities of the Lon and ClpAP proteases. Upon acetylation, HspQ stops being 
a Lon substrate and no longer enhances proteolysis of the Lon substrate Hha. The 
accumulated HspQ protein binds to the protease adaptor ClpS, hindering
proteolysis of ClpS-dependent substrates of ClpAP, such as Oat, a promoter of
antibiotic persistence. HspQ is acetylated by the protein acetyltransferase Pat
from acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) bound to the acetyl-CoA binding protein Qad. 
We now report that low cytoplasmic Mg2+ promotes qad expression, which protects
substrates of Lon and ClpSAP by increasing HspQ amounts. The qad promoter is
activated by PhoP, a regulatory protein highly activated in low cytoplasmic Mg2+ 
that also represses clpS transcription. Both the qad gene and PhoP repression of 
the clpS promoter are necessary for antibiotic persistence. PhoP also promotes
qad transcription in Escherichia coli, which shares a similar PhoP box in the qad
promoter region with S. Typhimurium, Salmonella bongori, and Enterobacter
cloacae. Our findings identify cytoplasmic Mg2+ and the PhoP protein as critical 
regulators of protease specificity in multiple enteric bacteria. IMPORTANCE The
bacterium Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium narrows down the spectrum of
substrates degraded by the proteases Lon and ClpAP in response to low cytoplasmic
Mg2+, a condition that decreases protein synthesis. This control is exerted by
PhoP, a transcriptional regulator activated in low cytoplasmic Mg2+ that governs 
proteostasis and is conserved in enteric bacteria. The uncovered mechanism
enables bacteria to control the abundance of preexisting proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00143-21 
PMCID: PMC8223949 [Available on 2021-12-22]
PMID: 33941609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mutat Res. 2021 Jan-Jun;822:111742. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2021.111742. Epub 2021 
Mar 10.

DNA damage-signaling, homologous recombination and genetic mutation induced by
5-azacytidine and DNA-protein crosslinks in Escherichia coli.

Klaric JA(1), Glass DJ(1), Perr EL(1), Reuven AD(1), Towne MJ(1), Lovett ST(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Rosentiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, 02454-9110, United States.
(2)Department of Biology and Rosentiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, 02454-9110, United States. Electronic address: 
lovett@brandeis.edu.

Covalent linkage between DNA and proteins produces highly toxic lesions and can
be caused by commonly used chemotherapeutic agents, by internal and external
chemicals and by radiation. In this study, using Escherichia coli, we investigate
the consequences of 5-azacytidine (5-azaC), which traps covalent complexes
between itself and the Dcm cytosine methyltransferase protein. DNA protein
crosslink-dependent effects can be ascertained by effects that arise in wild-type
but not in dcmΔ strains. We find that 5-azaC induces the bacterial DNA damage
response and stimulates homologous recombination, a component of which is
Dcm-dependent. Template-switching at an imperfect inverted repeat
("quasipalindrome", QP) is strongly enhanced by 5-azaC and this enhancement was
entirely Dcm-dependent and independent of double-strand break repair. The SOS
response helps ameliorate the mutagenic effect of 5-azaC but this is not a result
of SOS-induced DNA polymerases since their induction, especially PolIV, seems to 
stimulate QP-associated mutagenesis. Cell division regulator SulA was also
required for recovery of QP mutants induced by 5-azaC. In the absence of Lon
protease, Dcm-dependent QP-mutagenesis is strongly elevated, suggesting it may
play a role in DPC tolerance. Deletions at short tandem repeats, which occur
likewise by a replication template-switch, are elevated, but only modestly, by
5-azaC. We see evidence for Dcm-dependent and-independent killing by 5-azaC in
sensitive mutants, such as recA, recB, and lon; homologous recombination and
deletion mutations are also stimulated in part by a Dcm-independent effect of
5-azaC. Whether this occurs by a different protein/DNA crosslink or by an
alternative form of DNA damage is unknown.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2021.111742 
PMCID: PMC8288033 [Available on 2022-03-10]
PMID: 33743507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 25;12:647305. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.647305.
eCollection 2021.

Evidence for Involvement of the Salmonella enterica Z-Ring Assembly Factors ZapA 
and ZapB in Resistance to Bile.

Fernández-Fernández R(1), Hernández SB(1), Puerta-Fernández E(1), Sánchez-Romero 
MA(1), Urdaneta V(1), Casadesús J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla,
Sevilla, Spain.

Genes annotated as ygfE and yiiU in the genome of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium encode proteins homologous to Escherichia coli cell division factors 
ZapA and ZapB, respectively. ZapA- and ZapB- mutants of S. enterica are
bile-sensitive. The amount of zapB mRNA increases in the presence of a sublethal 
concentration of sodium deoxycholate (DOC) while zapA mRNA remains unaffected.
Increased zapB mRNA level in the presence of DOC is not caused by upregulation of
zapB transcription but by increased stability of zapB mRNA. This increase is
suppressed by an hfq mutation, suggesting the involvement of a small regulatory
RNA. We provide evidence that such sRNA is MicA. The ZapB protein is degraded in 
the presence of DOC, and degradation appears to involve the Lon protease. We
propose that increased stability of zapB mRNA in the presence of DOC may counter 
degradation of bile-damaged ZapB, thereby providing sufficient level of
functional ZapB protein to permit Z-ring assembly in the presence of bile.

Copyright © 2021 Fernández-Fernández, Hernández, Puerta-Fernández,
Sánchez-Romero, Urdaneta and Casadesús.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.647305 
PMCID: PMC7947894
PMID: 33717045 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


5. J Mol Biol. 2021 Apr 16;433(8):166890. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166890. Epub 2021 
Feb 23.

A Novel, Universally Active C-terminal Protein Degradation Signal Generated by
Alternative Splicing.

Peter SA(1), Isaac JS(1), Narberhaus F(2), Weigand JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt 64287,
Germany.
(2)Microbial Biology, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum 44780, Germany.
(3)Department of Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt 64287,
Germany. Electronic address: julia.weigand@tu-darmstadt.de.

Proteome integrity is crucial for cellular homeostasis and adaptation to stress
conditions such as hypoxia. One mechanism for rapid adaptation of the proteome in
response to changing environmental signals is alternative splicing. In addition
to generating different protein isoforms, alternative splicing is also capable of
controlling total protein levels by the regulated synthesis of non-productive
mRNA isoforms. The hypoxia-induced isoform E of the tumor suppressor MAX is
produced by retention and translation of the last intron. This leads to an
alternative C-terminus that harbors a potent C-degron, the isoE degron.
Strikingly, the isoE degron represents a universal protein degradation signal
that is not only functional in mammalian cells, but also in yeast and even in
bacteria. Essential for efficient protein decay is a conserved (F/W)xxW motif.
Degradation of isoE tagged proteins is mediated by the proteasome in eukaryotes
and Lon protease in bacteria. Thus, the isoE degron is a broadly applicable and
highly efficient tool in protein analyses.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166890 
PMID: 33636164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


6. Nat Biotechnol. 2021 Jun;39(6):754-764. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-00805-3. Epub
2021 Feb 11.

A bacterial protease depletes c-MYC and increases survival in mouse models of
bladder and colon cancer.

Butler DSC(#)(1), Cafaro C(#)(1), Putze J(2), Wan MLY(1), Tran TH(1), Ambite
I(1), Ahmadi S(1), Kjellström S(3), Welinder C(4), Chao SM(5), Dobrindt U(2),
Svanborg C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Institute of Hygiene, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, BioMS, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Oncology and Pathology, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Nephrology Service, KK Women's and Children's
Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. catharina.svanborg@med.lu.se.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2021 Apr;21(4):214-215.

Is the oncogene MYC upregulated or hyperactive? In the majority of human cancers,
finding agents that target c-MYC has proved difficult. Here we report specific
bacterial effector molecules that inhibit cellular MYC (c-MYC) in human cells. We
show that uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) degrade the c-MYC protein and
attenuate MYC expression in both human cells and animal tissues. c-MYC protein
was rapidly degraded by both cell-free bacterial lysates and the purified
bacterial protease Lon. In mice, intravesical or peroral delivery of Lon protease
delayed tumor progression and increased survival in MYC-dependent bladder and
colon cancer models, respectively. These results suggest that bacteria have
evolved strategies to control c-MYC tissue levels in the host and that the Lon
protease shows promise for therapeutic targeting of c-MYC in cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41587-020-00805-3 
PMID: 33574609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Acta Naturae. 2020 Oct-Dec;12(4):86-97. doi: 10.32607/actanaturae.11197.

Involvement of the N Domain Residues E34, K35, and R38 in the Functionally Active
Structure of Escherichia coli Lon Protease.

Andrianova AG(1), Kudzhaev AM(1), Abrikosova VA(1), Gustchina AE(2), Smirnov
IV(1), Rotanova TV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, 117997 Russia.
(2)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, NCI-Frederick, P.O. Box B,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

ATP-dependent Lon protease of Escherichia coli (EcLon), which belongs to the
superfamily of AAA+ proteins, is a key component of the cellular proteome quality
control system. It is responsible for the cleavage of mutant, damaged, and
short-lived regulatory proteins that are potentially dangerous for the cell.
EcLon functions as a homooligomer whose subunits contain a central characteristic
AAA+ module, a C-terminal protease domain, and an N-terminal non-catalytic region
composed of the actual N-terminal domain and the inserted α-helical domain. An
analysis of the N domain crystal structure suggested a potential involvement of
residues E34, K35, and R38 in the formation of stable and active EcLon. We
prepared and studied a triple mutant LonEKR in which these residues were replaced
with alanine. The introduced substitutions were shown to affect the
conformational stability and nucleotide-induced intercenter allosteric
interactions, as well as the formation of the proper protein binding site.

Copyright ® 2020 National Research University Higher School of Economics.

DOI: 10.32607/actanaturae.11197 
PMCID: PMC7800598
PMID: 33456980 


8. J Bacteriol. 2021 Feb 8;203(5). pii: e00616-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00616-20. Print
2021 Feb 8.

Lon Protease- and Temperature-Dependent Activity of a Lysis Cassette Located in
the Insecticidal Island of Yersinia enterocolitica.

Springer K(1), Sänger PA(2), Felsl A(1), Fuchs TM(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)ZIEL-Institute for Food & Health and Lehrstuhl für Mikrobielle Ökologie,
Department Biowissenschaftliche Grundlagen, Technische Universität München,
Freising, Germany.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institut für Molekulare Pathogenese, Jena,
Germany.
(3)ZIEL-Institute for Food & Health and Lehrstuhl für Mikrobielle Ökologie,
Department Biowissenschaftliche Grundlagen, Technische Universität München,
Freising, Germany thilom.fuchs@fli.de.

The Yersinia genus comprises pathogens that can adapt to an environmental life
cycle stage as well as to mammals. Yersinia enterocolitica strain W22703 exhibits
both insecticidal and nematocidal activity conferred by the tripartite toxin
complex (Tc) that is encoded on the 19-kb pathogenicity island Tc-PAI Ye All tc
genes follow a strict temperature regulation in that they are silenced at 37°C
but activated at lower temperatures. Four highly conserved phage-related genes,
located within the Tc-PAI Ye , were recently demonstrated to encode a
biologically functional holin-endolysin gene cassette that lyses its own host
W22703 at 37°C. Conditions transcriptionally activating the cassette are not yet 
known. In contrast to Escherichia coli, the overproduction of holin and endolysin
did not result in cell lysis of strain W22703 at 15°C. When the holin-endolysin
genes were overexpressed at 15°C in four Y. enterocolitica biovars and in four
other Yersinia spp., a heterogenous pattern of phenotypes was observed, ranging
from lysis resistance of a biovar 1A strain to the complete growth arrest of a Y.
kristensenii strain. To decipher the molecular mechanism underlying this
temperature-dependent lysis, we constructed a Lon protease-negative mutant of
W22703 in which the overexpression of the lysis cassette leads to cell death at
15°C. Overexpressed endolysin exhibited a high proteolytic susceptibility in
strain W22703 but remained stable in the W22703 Δlon strain or in Y.
pseudotuberculosis Although artificial overexpression was applied here, the data 
indicate that Lon protease plays a role in the control of the
temperature-dependent lysis in Y. enterocolitica W22703.IMPORTANCE The
investigation of the mechanisms that help pathogens survive in the environment is
a prerequisite to understanding their evolution and their virulence capacities.
In members of the genus Yersinia, many factors involved in virulence, metabolism,
motility, or biofilm formation follow a strict temperature-dependent regulation. 
While the molecular mechanisms underlying the activation of determinants at body 
temperature have been analyzed in detail, the molecular basis of
low-temperature-dependent phenotypes is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate
that a novel phage-related lysis cassette, which is part of the insecticidal and 
nematocidal pathogenicity island of Y. enterocolitica, does not lyse its own host
following overexpression at 15°C and that the Lon protease is involved in this
phenotype.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00616-20 
PMCID: PMC7890549
PMID: 33288626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Front Microbiol. 2020 Oct 20;11:575031. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.575031.
eCollection 2020.

Novel Chromosomal Mutations Responsible for Fosfomycin Resistance in Escherichia 
coli.

Cattoir V(1)(2)(3), Pourbaix A(4), Magnan M(4), Chau F(4), de Lastours V(4)(5),
Felden B(3), Fantin B(4)(5), Guérin F(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)CHU de Rennes, Service de Bactériologie-Hygiène Hospitalière, Rennes, France.
(2)Centre National de Référence sur la Résistance aux Antibiotiques (laboratoire 
associé 'Entérocoques'), Rennes, France.
(3)Inserm, Bacterial Regulatory RNAs and Medicine - UMR_S 1230, Rennes, France.
(4)IAME, UMR-1137, Inserm and Université de Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(5)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Beaujon, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)CHU de Caen, Service de Microbiologie, Caen, France.
(7)Université de Caen Normandie, EA4655, Caen, France.

Fosfomycin resistance in Escherichia coli results from chromosomal mutations or
acquisition of plasmid-mediated genes. Because these mechanisms may be absent in 
some resistant isolates, we aimed at decipher the genetic basis of fosfomycin
resistance in E. coli. Different groups of isolates were studied:
fosfomycin-resistant mutants selected in vitro from E. coli CFT073 (MIC = 1 mg/L)
and two groups (wildtype and non-wildtype) of E. coli clinical isolates.
Single-nucleotide allelic replacement was performed to confirm the implication of
novel mutations into resistance. Induction of uhpT expression by
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) was assessed by RT-qPCR. The genome of all clinical
isolates was sequenced by MiSeq (Illumina). Two first-step mutants were obtained 
in vitro from CFT073 (MICs, 128 mg/L) with single mutations: G469R in uhpB (M3); 
F384L in uhpC (M4). Second-step mutants (MICs, 256 mg/L) presented additional
mutations: R282V in galU (M7 from M3); Q558∗ in lon (M8 from M4). Introduction of
uhpB or uhpC mutations by site-directed mutagenesis conferred a 128-fold increase
in fosfomycin MICs, whereas single mutations in galU or lon were only responsible
for a 2-fold increase. Also, these mutations abolished the induction of uhpT
expression by G6P. All 14 fosfomycin-susceptible clinical isolates (MICs, 0.5-8
mg/L) were devoid of any mutation. At least one genetic change was detected in
all but one fosfomycin-resistant clinical isolates (MICs, 32 - >256 mg/L)
including 8, 17, 18, 5, and 8 in uhpA, uhpB, uhpC, uhpT, and glpT genes,
respectively. In conclusion, novel mutations in uhpB and uhpC are associated with
fosfomycin resistance in E. coli clinical isolates.

Copyright © 2020 Cattoir, Pourbaix, Magnan, Chau, de Lastours, Felden, Fantin and
Guérin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.575031 
PMCID: PMC7607045
PMID: 33193186 


10. Microorganisms. 2020 Oct 27;8(11). pii: E1662. doi:
10.3390/microorganisms8111662.

Transcriptomic Analysis of Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli during Initial 
Contact with Cattle Colonic Explants.

Stromberg ZR(1), Masonbrink RE(2), Mellata M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Iowa State University, Ames,
IA 50011, USA.
(2)Genome Informatics Facility, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Foodborne pathogens are a public health threat globally. Shiga toxin-producing
Escherichia coli (STEC), particularly O26, O111, and O157 STEC, are often
associated with foodborne illness in humans. To create effective preharvest
interventions, it is critical to understand which factors STEC strains use to
colonize the gastrointestinal tract of cattle, which serves as the reservoir for 
these pathogens. Several colonization factors are known, but little is understood
about initial STEC colonization factors. Our objective was to identify these
factors via contrasting gene expression between nonpathogenic E. coli and STEC.
Colonic explants were inoculated with nonpathogenic E. coli strain MG1655 or STEC
strains (O26, O111, or O157), bacterial colonization levels were determined, and 
RNA was isolated and sequenced. STEC strains adhered to colonic explants at
numerically but not significantly higher levels compared to MG1655. After
incubation with colonic explants, flagellin (fliC) was upregulated (log2
fold-change = 4.0, p < 0.0001) in O157 STEC, and collectively, Lon protease (lon)
was upregulated (log2 fold-change = 3.6, p = 0.0009) in STEC strains compared to 
MG1655. These results demonstrate that H7 flagellum and Lon protease may play
roles in early colonization and could be potential targets to reduce colonization
in cattle.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8111662 
PMCID: PMC7693793
PMID: 33120988 


############# ((lrp) AND (atpA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2020 Jul 29;84(3). pii: e00030-17. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00030-17. Print 2020 Aug 19.

A Thermosensitive, Phase-Variable Epigenetic Switch: pap Revisited.

Zamora M(#)(1)(2), Ziegler CA(#)(3), Freddolino PL(3)(4), Wolfe AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Stritch School of Medicine, Health Sciences Division, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA
awolfe@luc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

It has been more than a decade since the last comprehensive review of the
phase-variable uropathogen-associated pyelonephritis-associated pilus (pap)
genetic switch. Since then, important data have come to light, including
additional factors that regulate pap expression, better characterization of H-NS 
regulation, the structure of the Lrp octamer in complex with pap regulatory DNA, 
the temperature-insensitive phenotype of a mutant lacking the acetyltransferase
RimJ, evidence that key components of the regulatory machinery are acetylated,
and new insights into the role of DNA binding by key regulators in shaping both
the physical structure and regulatory state of the papI and papBA promoters. This
review revisits pap, integrating these newer observations with older ones to
produce a new model for the concerted behavior of this virulence-regulatory
region.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00030-17 
PMCID: PMC7392537
PMID: 32727743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4334-42.

The N-acetyltransferase RimJ responds to environmental stimuli to repress pap
fimbrial transcription in Escherichia coli.

White-Ziegler CA(1), Black AM, Eliades SH, Young S, Porter K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA. cwhitezi@science.smith.edu.

In uropathogenic Escherichia coli, P pili (Pap) facilitate binding to host
epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. Whereas P pili can be produced at
37 degrees C, the expression of these fimbriae is suppressed at 23 degrees C.
Previously, insertion mutations in rimJ, a gene encoding the N-terminal
acetyltransferase of ribosomal protein S5, were shown to disrupt this
thermoregulatory response, allowing papBA transcription at low temperature. In
this study, we created an in-frame deletion of rimJ. This deletion relieved the
repressive effects not only of low temperature but also of rich (Luria-Bertani
[LB]) medium and glucose on papBA transcription, indicating that RimJ modulates
papBA transcription in response to multiple environmental stimuli. papI
transcription was also shown to be regulated by RimJ. papBA transcription is also
controlled by a phase variation mechanism. We demonstrated that the regulators
necessary to establish a phase ON state--PapI, PapB, Dam, Lrp, and cyclic
AMP-CAP-are still required for papBA transcription in a rimJ mutant strain. rimJ 
mutations increase the rate at which bacteria transition into the phase ON state,
indicating that RimJ inhibits the phase OFF-->ON transition. A DeltarimJ hns651
mutant is viable on LB medium but not on minimal medium. This synthetic
lethality, along with transcriptional analyses, indicates that RimJ and H-NS work
through separate pathways to control papBA transcription. Mutations in rimJ do
not greatly influence the transcription of the fan, daa, or fim operon,
suggesting that RimJ may be a pap-specific regulator. Overexpression of rimJ
under conditions repressive for papBA transcription complements the DeltarimJ
mutation but has little effect on transcription under activating conditions,
indicating that the ability of RimJ to regulate transcription is environmentally 
controlled.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.16.4334-4342.2002 
PMCID: PMC135235
PMID: 12142402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Mar;39(6):1504-22.

The essential role of the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP in pap phase
variation: Lrp- and helical phase-dependent activation of papBA transcription by 
CAP from -215.

Weyand NJ(1), Braaten BA, van der Woude M, Tucker J, Low DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) is essential for the expression of Pap
pili by uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Both in vitro and in vivo analyses
indicate that binding of cAMP-CAP centred at 215.5 bp upstream of the papBA
promoter is essential for activation of transcription. CAP-dependent activation
of papBA requires binding of the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) at
binding sites that extend from -180 to -149 relative to the start site of papBA. 
Our data indicate that CAP and Lrp bind independently to their respective pap DNA
sites. Activation of papBA transcription was eliminated by mutations in the
activating region 1 (AR1) of CAP, but not in the AR2 region, similar to class I
CAP-dependent promoters. Also, like class I promoters, the C-terminal domain of
the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase appears to play a role in transcription
activation. Moreover, phase variation is strictly dependent upon the helical
phase of the CAP DNA binding site with respect to the papBA transcription start
site. Using an 'oriented heterodimer' approach with wild-type and AR1 mutant
CAPs, it was shown that the AR1 region of the CAP subunit proximal to papBA is
required for stimulation of papBA transcription, whereas AR1 of the
promoter-distal subunit is not. Previously, CAP was hypothesized to activate pap 
transcription indirectly by disrupting repression mediated by H-NS. The results
presented here show that AR1 of the promoter-proximal CAP subunit was required
for papBA transcription even in the absence of the histone-like protein H-NS.
These results show that the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP, bound 215.5 bp
upstream of the papBA transcription start site, plays an active role in
stimulating papBA transcription, possibly by interacting with the C-terminal
domain of the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02338.x 
PMID: 11260468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (atpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2020 Jul 29;84(3). pii: e00030-17. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00030-17. Print 2020 Aug 19.

A Thermosensitive, Phase-Variable Epigenetic Switch: pap Revisited.

Zamora M(#)(1)(2), Ziegler CA(#)(3), Freddolino PL(3)(4), Wolfe AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Stritch School of Medicine, Health Sciences Division, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA
awolfe@luc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

It has been more than a decade since the last comprehensive review of the
phase-variable uropathogen-associated pyelonephritis-associated pilus (pap)
genetic switch. Since then, important data have come to light, including
additional factors that regulate pap expression, better characterization of H-NS 
regulation, the structure of the Lrp octamer in complex with pap regulatory DNA, 
the temperature-insensitive phenotype of a mutant lacking the acetyltransferase
RimJ, evidence that key components of the regulatory machinery are acetylated,
and new insights into the role of DNA binding by key regulators in shaping both
the physical structure and regulatory state of the papI and papBA promoters. This
review revisits pap, integrating these newer observations with older ones to
produce a new model for the concerted behavior of this virulence-regulatory
region.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00030-17 
PMCID: PMC7392537
PMID: 32727743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Infect Immun. 2016 Jan 11;84(3):811-21. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01302-15.

Regulation of Expression of Uropathogenic Escherichia coli Nonfimbrial Adhesin
TosA by PapB Homolog TosR in Conjunction with H-NS and Lrp.

Engstrom MD(1), Mobley HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA hmobley@umich.edu.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are a major burden to human health. The
overwhelming majority of UTIs are caused by uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC)
strains. Unlike some pathogens, UPEC strains do not have a fixed core set of
virulence and fitness factors but do have a variety of adhesins and regulatory
pathways. One such UPEC adhesin is the nonfimbrial adhesin TosA, which mediates
adherence to the epithelium of the upper urinary tract. The tos operon is AT
rich, resides on pathogenicity island aspV, and is not expressed under laboratory
conditions. Because of this, we hypothesized that tosA expression is silenced by 
H-NS. Lrp, based on its prominent function in the regulation of other adhesins,
is also hypothesized to contribute to tos operon regulation. Using a variety of
in vitro techniques, we mapped both the tos operon promoter and TosR binding
sites. We have now identified TosR as a dual regulator of the tos operon, which
could control the tos operon in association with H-NS and Lrp. H-NS is a negative
regulator of the tos operon, and Lrp positively regulates the tos operon.
Exogenous leucine also inhibits Lrp-mediated tos operon positive regulation. In
addition, TosR binds to the pap operon, which encodes another important UPEC
adhesin, P fimbria. Induction of TosR synthesis reduces production of P fimbria. 
These studies advance our knowledge of regulation of adhesin expression
associated with uropathogen colonization of a host.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01302-15 
PMCID: PMC4771353
PMID: 26755158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Dec;153(Pt 12):4138-4149. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/010363-0.

Comparative analysis of FimB and FimE recombinase activity.

Holden N(1), Blomfield IC(2), Uhlin BE(3), Totsika M(1), Kulasekara DH(4), Gally 
DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Diseases, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Medicine,
Chancellor's Building, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK.
(2)Biomedical Research Group, Department of Biosciences, University of Kent, Kent
CT2 7NJ, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

FimB and FimE are site-specific recombinases, part of the lambda integrase
family, and invert a 314 bp DNA switch that controls the expression of type 1
fimbriae in Escherichia coli. FimB and FimE differ in their activity towards the 
fim switch, with FimB catalysing inversion in both directions in comparison to
the higher-frequency but unidirectional on-to-off recombination catalysed by
FimE. Previous work has demonstrated that FimB, but not FimE, recombination is
completely inhibited in vitro and in vivo by a regulator, PapB, expressed from a 
distinct fimbrial locus. The aim of this work was to investigate differences
between FimB and FimE activity by exploiting the differential inhibition
demonstrated by PapB. The research focused on genetic changes to the fim switch
that alter recombinase binding and its structural context. FimB and FimE still
recombined a switch in which the majority of fimS DNA was replaced with a larger 
region of non-fim DNA. This demonstrated a minimal requirement for FimB and FimE 
recombination of the Fim binding sites and associated inverted repeats. With the 
original leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) and integration host factor 
(IHF)-dependent structure removed, PapB was now able to inhibit both
recombinases. The relative affinities of FimB and FimE were determined for the
four 'half sites'. This analysis, along with the effect of extensive swaps and
duplications of the half sites on recombination frequency, demonstrated that FimB
recruitment and therefore subsequent activity was dependent on a single half site
and its context, whereas FimE recombination was less stringent, being able to
interact initially with two half sites with equally high affinity. While
increasing FimB recombination frequencies failed to overcome PapB repression,
mutations made in recombinase binding sites resulted in inhibition of FimE
recombination by PapB. Overall, the data support a model in which the
recombinases differ in loading order and co-operative interactions. PapB exploits
this difference and FimE becomes susceptible when its normal loading is
restricted or changed.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/010363-0 
PMID: 18048927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4334-42.

The N-acetyltransferase RimJ responds to environmental stimuli to repress pap
fimbrial transcription in Escherichia coli.

White-Ziegler CA(1), Black AM, Eliades SH, Young S, Porter K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA. cwhitezi@science.smith.edu.

In uropathogenic Escherichia coli, P pili (Pap) facilitate binding to host
epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. Whereas P pili can be produced at
37 degrees C, the expression of these fimbriae is suppressed at 23 degrees C.
Previously, insertion mutations in rimJ, a gene encoding the N-terminal
acetyltransferase of ribosomal protein S5, were shown to disrupt this
thermoregulatory response, allowing papBA transcription at low temperature. In
this study, we created an in-frame deletion of rimJ. This deletion relieved the
repressive effects not only of low temperature but also of rich (Luria-Bertani
[LB]) medium and glucose on papBA transcription, indicating that RimJ modulates
papBA transcription in response to multiple environmental stimuli. papI
transcription was also shown to be regulated by RimJ. papBA transcription is also
controlled by a phase variation mechanism. We demonstrated that the regulators
necessary to establish a phase ON state--PapI, PapB, Dam, Lrp, and cyclic
AMP-CAP-are still required for papBA transcription in a rimJ mutant strain. rimJ 
mutations increase the rate at which bacteria transition into the phase ON state,
indicating that RimJ inhibits the phase OFF-->ON transition. A DeltarimJ hns651
mutant is viable on LB medium but not on minimal medium. This synthetic
lethality, along with transcriptional analyses, indicates that RimJ and H-NS work
through separate pathways to control papBA transcription. Mutations in rimJ do
not greatly influence the transcription of the fan, daa, or fim operon,
suggesting that RimJ may be a pap-specific regulator. Overexpression of rimJ
under conditions repressive for papBA transcription complements the DeltarimJ
mutation but has little effect on transcription under activating conditions,
indicating that the ability of RimJ to regulate transcription is environmentally 
controlled.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.16.4334-4342.2002 
PMCID: PMC135235
PMID: 12142402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Mar;39(6):1504-22.

The essential role of the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP in pap phase
variation: Lrp- and helical phase-dependent activation of papBA transcription by 
CAP from -215.

Weyand NJ(1), Braaten BA, van der Woude M, Tucker J, Low DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) is essential for the expression of Pap
pili by uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Both in vitro and in vivo analyses
indicate that binding of cAMP-CAP centred at 215.5 bp upstream of the papBA
promoter is essential for activation of transcription. CAP-dependent activation
of papBA requires binding of the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) at
binding sites that extend from -180 to -149 relative to the start site of papBA. 
Our data indicate that CAP and Lrp bind independently to their respective pap DNA
sites. Activation of papBA transcription was eliminated by mutations in the
activating region 1 (AR1) of CAP, but not in the AR2 region, similar to class I
CAP-dependent promoters. Also, like class I promoters, the C-terminal domain of
the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase appears to play a role in transcription
activation. Moreover, phase variation is strictly dependent upon the helical
phase of the CAP DNA binding site with respect to the papBA transcription start
site. Using an 'oriented heterodimer' approach with wild-type and AR1 mutant
CAPs, it was shown that the AR1 region of the CAP subunit proximal to papBA is
required for stimulation of papBA transcription, whereas AR1 of the
promoter-distal subunit is not. Previously, CAP was hypothesized to activate pap 
transcription indirectly by disrupting repression mediated by H-NS. The results
presented here show that AR1 of the promoter-proximal CAP subunit was required
for papBA transcription even in the absence of the histone-like protein H-NS.
These results show that the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP, bound 215.5 bp
upstream of the papBA transcription start site, plays an active role in
stimulating papBA transcription, possibly by interacting with the C-terminal
domain of the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02338.x 
PMID: 11260468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (glyA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Jul;25(1):39-51.

Alterations in the flow of one-carbon units affect KinB-dependent sporulation in 
Bacillus subtilis.

Dartois V(1), Liu J, Hoch JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. vdartois@pasteur.fr

Endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis is primarily dependent on the
phosphorylation of the key transcription factor Spo0A by two major kinases, KinA 
and KinB, thought to be activated by distinct signals. Using a strategy designed 
to detect mutations that specifically affect the signalling pathway to KinB, we
have isolated a Tn10 insertion mutant in one of two adjacent lrp-like genes
coding for homologues of the Escherichia coli leucine-responsive regulatory
protein (Lrp) and another mutant in the glyA gene encoding the serine
hydroxymethyl transferase (SHMT). SHMT catalyses interconversion of serine and
glycine while transferring the resulting one-carbon unit into the C1 pool through
methylene tetrahydrofolate. Sporulation experiments performed in a series of
supplemented media indicated that the role of SHMT in the KinB pathway is to feed
the pool of C1 units recruited for the biosynthesis of key metabolites, which
include the methyl donor S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM). The results of experiments 
using L-ethionine suggest that SAM is involved in post-synthetic methylation
reactions or biosynthesis of metabolites that serve to activate KinB. Truncated
LrpA and LrpB peptides that have retained the DNA-binding domain but have lost
the C-terminal half of the protein appear to act as repressors of glyA
transcription and KinB-dependent sporulation. However, deletions of lrpA, lrpB or
lrpAB have little effect on glyA transcription or sporulation through KinB,
suggesting that other effectors, such as additional Lrp homologues, may act in
conjunction with LrpA and LrpB. Our results indicate that lrpA-lrpB together with
the biosynthetic glyA gene lie on a common signalling pathway meant to activate
the KinB sensor kinase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.4491805.x 
PMID: 11902725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochimie. 1994;76(10-11):1063-70.

The role of H-NS in one carbon metabolism.

Landgraf JR(1), Levinthal M, Danchin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, W Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA.

The H-NS protein of Escherichia coli regulates the expression of genes involved
in many general processes such as osmoregulation and virulence. More recently,
H-NS was shown to exert an effect on ilvIH gene expression in conjunction with
the leucine responsive regulatory protein (Lrp). We show that H-NS is involved in
the transcriptional regulation of the kbl/tdh operon, which is also Lrp
regulated. Insertional inactivation of the hns gene results in two-fold
derepression of the kbl/tdh operon. This level of expression is sufficient to
suppress the auxotrophic requirements imposed by a glyA mutation. We show that
expression of the kbl/tdh operon is temperature controlled and that this control 
is not mediated through H-NS action as has been shown for some other temperature 
controlled genes.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(94)90031-0 
PMID: 7748928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (leuD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Apr;243(1):24-31.

The NlaIV restriction and modification genes of Neisseria lactamica are flanked
by leucine biosynthesis genes.

Lau PC(1), Forghani F, Labbé D, Bergeron H, Brousseau R, Höltke HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, National Research Council of Canada,
Montreal, Quebec.

Erratum in
    Mol Gen Genet 1994 Jul 25;244(2):167.

The genes encoding the Neisseria lactamica restriction endonuclease IV (R.NlaIV) 
and its cognate DNA methyltransferase (M.NlaIV), both of which recognize the
sequence GGNNCC, have been cloned in Escherichia coli and overexpressed using the
T7 polymerase/promoter system. Analysis of a sequenced 3.58 kb fragment
established the gene order, leuD-M.NlaIV-R.NlaIV-leuB. The predicted primary
sequence of M.NlaIV (423 amino acids) shows the highest degree of identity to a
pair of cytosine-specific methyltransferases, M.BanI (44.9%) and M.HgiCI (44.3%),
which recognize the sequence GGYRCC (Y, pyrimidines; R, purines). In contrast,
the R.NlaIV protein sequence (243 amino acids) is unique in the existing
data-base, a situation that holds for most endonucleases. Flanking the NlaIV
modification and restriction genes are homologues of the leuD and leuB genes of
enteric bacteria, which code for enzymes in the leucine biosynthesis pathway.
This gene context implies a possible new mode of gene regulation for the RM.NlaIV
system, which would involve a mechanism similar to the recently discovered
leucine/Lrp regulon in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00283872 
PMID: 8190068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((marA) AND (glpX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Feb;69(2):390-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkt352. Epub 2013 
Sep 15.

Regulation of acrAB expression by cellular metabolites in Escherichia coli.

Ruiz C(1), Levy SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance and the Department of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Multidrug efflux pumps mediate resistance to antibiotics and other
toxic compounds. We studied the role of AcrAB-TolC, the main efflux pump in
Escherichia coli, in regulating gene expression.
METHODS: Deletion mutants, an acrABp-lacZ fusion and reverse
transcription-real-time quantitative PCR experiments were used to study the role 
of AcrAB-TolC and metabolism in regulating gene expression of the acrAB operon
and its transcriptional regulators.
RESULTS: Deletion of the acrB gene increased the expression of the acrAB operon. 
A similar induction of acrAB was found when acrA or tolC was deleted, and when
the pump function was inhibited using phenylalanine-arginine-β-naphthylamide. The
induction of acrAB in the ΔacrB strain was totally (AcrR or SoxS) or partially
(SoxR or MarA) prevented when the genes for these acrAB regulators were also
deleted. The expression of soxS and marA, but not of acrR, was increased in the
ΔacrB strain, which also showed altered expression of many other genes related to
different cellular processes, including motility. Deletion of the metabolic genes
entA and entE (enterobactin biosysnthesis), glpX (gluconeogenesis), cysH
(cysteine biosynthesis) and purA (purine biosynthesis) also prevented activation 
of the acrAB promoter in the ΔacrB strain. Addition of the enterobactin
biosynthesis intermediate metabolite 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate induced the expression
of acrAB.
CONCLUSIONS: These results together suggest a model in which the AcrAB-TolC pump 
effluxes cellular metabolites that are toxic and/or have a signalling role. If
the pump is inactivated or inhibited, these metabolites would accumulate,
inactivating AcrR and/or up-regulating soxS and marA expression, ultimately
triggering the up-regulation of acrAB expression to restore homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkt352 
PMCID: PMC3886929
PMID: 24043404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((mntR) AND (mntR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Mar 22;294(12):4583-4595. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006877. Epub
2019 Jan 31.

A Streptococcus aquaporin acts as peroxiporin for efflux of cellular hydrogen
peroxide and alleviation of oxidative stress.

Tong H(1)(2), Wang X(3)(2), Dong Y(3)(2), Hu Q(3)(2), Zhao Z(4), Zhu Y(4), Dong
L(3), Bai F(4), Dong X(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100101, China, tonghuichun@im.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Shijingshan
District, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100101, China.
(4)Biomedical Pioneering Innovation Center (BIOPIC), School of Life Sciences,
Peking University, No. 5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100871, China.
(5)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100101, China, dongxz@im.ac.cn.

Aquaporins (AQPs) are transmembrane proteins widely distributed in various
organisms, and they facilitate bidirectional diffusion of water and uncharged
solutes. The catalase-negative bacterium Streptococcus oligofermentans produces
the highest H2O2 levels reported to date, which has to be exported to avoid
oxidative stress. Here, we report that a S. oligofermentans aquaporin functions
as a peroxiporin facilitating bidirectional transmembrane H2O2 transport.
Knockout of this aquaporin homolog, So-AqpA, reduced H2O2 export by ∼50% and
increased endogenous H2O2 retention, as indicated by the cellular H2O2 reporter
HyPer. Heterologous expression of So-aqpA accelerated exogenous H2O2 influx into 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli cells, indicating that So-AqpA acts
as an H2O2-transferring aquaporin. Alanine substitution revealed Phe-40 as a key 
residue for So-AqpA-mediated H2O2 transport. Northern blotting, qPCR, and
luciferase reporter assays disclosed that H2O2 induces a >10-fold expression of
So-aqpA Super-resolution imaging showed that H2O2 treatment increases So-AqpA
protein molecules per cell by 1.6- to 3-fold. Inactivation of two
redox-regulatory transcriptional repressors, PerR and MntR, reduced H2O2-induced 
So-aqpA expression to 1.8- and 4-fold, respectively. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays determined that MntR, but not PerR, binds to the So-aqpA promoter,
indicating that MntR directly regulates H2O2-induced So-aqpA expression.
Importantly, So-aqpA deletion decreased oxic growth and intraspecies competition 
and diminished the competitive advantages of S. oligofermentans over the caries
pathogen Streptococcus mutans Of note, So-aqpA orthologs with the functionally
important Phe-40 are present in all streptococci. Our work has uncovered an
intrinsic, H2O2-inducible bacterial peroxiporin that has a key physiological role
in H2O2 detoxification in S. oligofermentans.

© 2019 Tong et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006877 
PMCID: PMC6433050
PMID: 30705089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cell Chem Biol. 2018 Aug 16;25(8):962-973.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.04.016. Epub 2018 May 24.

Convergent Use of Heptacoordination for Cation Selectivity by RNA and Protein
Metalloregulators.

Bachas ST(1), Ferré-D'Amaré AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Biophysics Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Biochemistry and Biophysics Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: adrian.ferre@nih.gov.

The large yybP-ykoY family of bacterial riboswitches is broadly distributed
phylogenetically. Previously, these gene-regulatory RNAs were proposed to respond
to Mn2+. X-ray crystallography revealed a binuclear cation-binding pocket. This
comprises one hexacoordinate site, with six oxygen ligands, which preorganizes
the second, with five oxygen and one nitrogen ligands. The relatively soft
nitrogen ligand was proposed to confer affinity for Mn2+, but how this excludes
other soft cations remained enigmatic. By subjecting representative yybP-ykoY
riboswitches to diverse cations in vitro, we now find that these RNAs exhibit
limited transition metal ion selectivity. Among the cations tested, Cd2+ and Mn2+
bind most tightly, and comparison of three new Cd2+-bound crystal structures
suggests that these riboswitches achieve selectivity by enforcing
heptacoordination (favored by high-spin Cd2+ and Mn2+, but otherwise uncommon) in
the softer site. Remarkably, the Cd2+- and Mn2+-selective bacterial transcription
factor MntR also uses heptacoordination within a binuclear site to achieve
selectivity.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.04.016 
PMCID: PMC6097924
PMID: 29805037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Mar 20;14(1):2104-17. doi: 10.4238/2015.March.20.21.

Regulation of expression of sodA and msrA genes of Corynebacterium glutamicum in 
response to oxidative and radiative stress.

El Shafey HM(1), Ghanem S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Therapy Department, Microbiology Division, College of Medical
Rehabilitation Sciences, Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia
hatem.elshafey@laposte.net.
(2)Medical Laboratory Technology Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences,
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia.

Promoters of genes encoding superoxide dismutase (sodA) and peptide methionine
sulfoxide reductase (msrA) from Cory-nebacterium glutamicum were cloned and
sequenced. Promoter region analysis of sodA-msrA was unable to identify putative 
sites of fixed eventual regulators except for possible sites of fixed OxyR and
integra-tion host factor. A study of the regulation of these genes was performed 
using the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli as a reporter placed under the control of
sequences downstream of sodA and msrA. In silico analysis was used to identify
regulators in the genome of C. glutamicum, which revealed the absence of homologs
of soxRS and arcA and the presence of inactive oxyR and putative candidates of
the homologs of ahpC, ohrR, integration host factor, furA, IdeR, diphtheria toxin
repressor, and mntR.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.March.20.21 
PMID: 25867357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Jul 1;10:737. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145243.

Minimal metabolic pathway structure is consistent with associated biomolecular
interactions.

Bordbar A(1), Nagarajan H(2), Lewis NE(3), Latif H(1), Ebrahim A(1), Federowicz
S(2), Schellenberger J(2), Palsson BO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(2)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering 
and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability,
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark palsson@ucsd.edu.

Pathways are a universal paradigm for functionally describing cellular processes.
Even though advances in high-throughput data generation have transformed biology,
the core of our biological understanding, and hence data interpretation, is still
predicated on human-defined pathways. Here, we introduce an unbiased, pathway
structure for genome-scale metabolic networks defined based on principles of
parsimony that do not mimic canonical human-defined textbook pathways. Instead,
these minimal pathways better describe multiple independent pathway-associated
biomolecular interaction datasets suggesting a functional organization for
metabolism based on parsimonious use of cellular components. We use the inherent 
predictive capability of these pathways to experimentally discover novel
transcriptional regulatory interactions in Escherichia coli metabolism for three 
transcription factors, effectively doubling the known regulatory roles for Nac
and MntR. This study suggests an underlying and fundamental principle in the
evolutionary selection of pathway structures; namely, that pathways may be
minimal, independent, and segregated.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.20145243 
PMCID: PMC4299494
PMID: 24987116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2014 Jul;196(14):2587-97. doi: 10.1128/JB.01717-14. Epub 2014 May 2.

Novel MntR-independent mechanism of manganese homeostasis in Escherichia coli by 
the ribosome-associated protein HflX.

Kaur G(1), Sengupta S(2), Kumar V(1), Kumari A(1), Ghosh A(2), Parrack P(2),
Dutta D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biochemistry, CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, 
Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biochemistry, CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, 
Chandigarh, India dutta@imtech.res.in.

Manganese is a micronutrient required for activities of several important enzymes
under conditions of oxidative stress and iron starvation. In Escherichia coli,
the manganese homeostasis network primarily constitutes a manganese importer
(MntH) and an exporter (MntP), which are regulated by the MntR dual regulator. In
this study, we find that deletion of E. coli hflX, which encodes a
ribosome-associated GTPase with unknown function, renders extreme manganese
sensitivity characterized by arrested cell growth, filamentation, lower rate of
replication, and DNA damage. We demonstrate that perturbation by manganese
induces unprecedented influx of manganese in ΔhflX cells compared to that in the 
wild-type E. coli strain. Interestingly, our study indicates that the imbalance
in manganese homeostasis in the ΔhflX strain is independent of the MntR regulon. 
Moreover, the influx of manganese leads to a simultaneous influx of zinc and
inhibition of iron import in ΔhflX cells. In order to review a possible link of
HflX with the λ phage life cycle, we performed a lysis-lysogeny assay to show
that the Mn-perturbed ΔhflX strain reduces the frequency of lysogenization of the
phage. This observation raises the possibility that the induced zinc influx in
the manganese-perturbed ΔhflX strain stimulates the activity of the
zinc-metalloprotease HflB, the key determinant of the lysis-lysogeny switch.
Finally, we propose that manganese-mediated autophosphorylation of HflX plays a
central role in manganese, zinc, and iron homeostasis in E. coli cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01717-14 
PMCID: PMC4097593
PMID: 24794564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Methods. 2012 Dec;58(4):392-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.07.015. Epub 2012 Jul
24.

Studying protein complexes by the yeast two-hybrid system.

Rajagopala SV(1), Sikorski P, Caufield JH, Tovchigrechko A, Uetz P.

Author information: 
(1)J Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. rajgsv@gmail.com

Protein complexes are typically analyzed by affinity purification and subsequent 
mass spectrometric analysis. However, in most cases the structure and topology of
the complexes remains elusive from such studies. Here we investigate how the
yeast two-hybrid system can be used to analyze direct interactions among proteins
in a complex. First we tested all pairwise interactions among the seven proteins 
of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase III as well as an uncharacterized complex that
includes MntR and PerR. Four and seven interactions were identified in these two 
complexes, respectively. In addition, we review Y2H data for three other
complexes of known structure which serve as "gold-standards", namely Varicella
Zoster Virus (VZV) ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), the yeast proteasome, and
bacteriophage lambda. Finally, we review an Y2H analysis of the human spliceosome
which may serve as an example for a dynamic mega-complex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.07.015 
PMCID: PMC3517932
PMID: 22841565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2011 Nov;193(21):5887-97. doi: 10.1128/JB.05872-11. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

The Escherichia coli MntR miniregulon includes genes encoding a small protein and
an efflux pump required for manganese homeostasis.

Waters LS(1), Sandoval M, Storz G.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Manganese is a critical micronutrient for cells, serving as an enzyme cofactor
and protecting against oxidative stress. Yet, manganese is toxic in excess and
little is known about its distribution in cells. Bacteria control intracellular
manganese levels by the transcription regulator MntR. When this work began, the
only Escherichia coli K-12 gene known to respond to manganese via MntR repression
was mntH, which encodes a manganese importer. We show that mntS (formerly the
small RNA gene rybA) is repressed by manganese through MntR and encodes an
unannotated 42-amino-acid protein. Overproduction of MntS causes manganese
sensitivity, while a lack of MntS perturbs proper manganese-dependent repression 
of mntH. We also provide evidence that mntP (formerly yebN), which encodes a
putative efflux pump, is positively regulated by MntR. Deletion of mntP leads to 
profound manganese sensitivity and to elevated intracellular manganese levels.
This work thus defines two new proteins involved in manganese homeostasis and
suggests mechanisms for their action.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.05872-11 
PMCID: PMC3194919
PMID: 21908668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021983. Epub 2011 Jul 14.

A novel manganese efflux system, YebN, is required for virulence by Xanthomonas
oryzae pv. oryzae.

Li C(1), Tao J, Mao D, He C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Manganese ions (Mn(2+)) play a crucial role in virulence and protection against
oxidative stress in bacterial pathogens. Such pathogens appear to have evolved
complex mechanisms for regulating Mn(2+) uptake and efflux. Despite numerous
studies on Mn(2+) uptake, however, only one efflux system has been identified to 
date. Here, we report on a novel Mn(2+) export system, YebN, in Xanthomonas
oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), the causative agent of bacterial leaf blight. Compared
with wild-type PXO99, the yebN mutant was highly sensitive to Mn(2+) and
accumulated high concentrations of intracellular manganese. In addition, we found
that expression of yebN was positively regulated by Mn(2+) and the
Mn(2+)-dependent transcription regulator, MntR. Interestingly, the yebN mutant
was more tolerant to methyl viologen and H(2)O(2) in low Mn(2+) medium than
PXO99, but more sensitive in high Mn(2+) medium, implying that YebN plays an
important role in Mn(2+) homoeostasis and detoxification of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Notably, deletion of yebN rendered Xoo sensitive to hypo-osmotic
shock, suggesting that YebN may protect against such stress. That mutation of
yebN substantially reduced the Xoo growth rate and lesion formation in rice
implies that YebN could be involved in Xoo fitness in host. Although YebN has two
DUF204 domains, it lacks homology to any known metal transporter. Hence, this is 
the first report of a novel metal export system that plays essential roles in
hypo-osmotic and oxidative stress, and virulence. Our results lay the foundations
for elucidating the complex and fascinating relationship between metal
homeostasis and host-pathogen interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021983 
PMCID: PMC3136493
PMID: 21789199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2011 Mar;193(6):1477-80. doi: 10.1128/JB.01230-10. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

The Escherichia coli K-12 MntR miniregulon includes dps, which encodes the major 
stationary-phase DNA-binding protein.

Yamamoto K(1), Ishihama A, Busby SJ, Grainger DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Bioscience and Research Center for Micro-Nano
Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8584, Japan.

Escherichia coli MntR protein is the Mn(2+)-responsive transcriptional repressor 
of the MntH manganese transporter. We have used chromatin immunoprecipitation to 
determine the distribution of Mn(2+)-MntR across the entire E. coli chromosome in
vivo, and we report that MntR binds to only four targets, adjacent to the mntH,
mntR, yebN, and dps genes. Unexpectedly, we found that dps expression is directly
repressed by Mn(2+)-MntR.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01230-10 
PMCID: PMC3067631
PMID: 21239586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proteins. 2009 Nov 15;77(3):741-6. doi: 10.1002/prot.22541.

Crystal structure of the manganese transport regulatory protein from Escherichia 
coli.

Tanaka T(1), Shinkai A, Bessho Y, Kumarevel T, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Photon Technology Division, RIKEN SPring-8 Center, Harima Institute, 
Hyogo 679-5148, Japan.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.22541 
PMID: 19701940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((mrp) AND (mrp)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 8;117(49):31166-31176. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2006276117. Epub 2020 Nov 23.

Structure of the Dietzia Mrp complex reveals molecular mechanism of this giant
bacterial sodium proton pump.

Li B(1)(2), Zhang K(3), Nie Y(3), Wang X(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang XC(4)(2), Wu
XL(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Chinese Academy of Sciences Center
for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049
Beijing, China.
(3)College of Engineering, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Chinese Academy of Sciences Center
for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China; xiaolei_wu@pku.edu.cn zhangc@ibp.ac.cn.
(5)College of Engineering, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China;
xiaolei_wu@pku.edu.cn zhangc@ibp.ac.cn.
(6)Institute of Ecology, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China.
(7)Institute of Ocean Research, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Sep 21;118(38):.

Multiple resistance and pH adaptation (Mrp) complexes are sophisticated
cation/proton exchangers found in a vast variety of alkaliphilic and/or
halophilic microorganisms, and are critical for their survival in highly
challenging environments. This family of antiporters is likely to represent the
ancestor of cation pumps found in many redox-driven transporter complexes,
including the complex I of the respiratory chain. Here, we present the
three-dimensional structure of the Mrp complex from a Dietzia sp. strain solved
at 3.0-Å resolution using the single-particle cryoelectron microscopy method. Our
structure-based mutagenesis and functional analyses suggest that the substrate
translocation pathways for the driving substance protons and the substrate sodium
ions are separated in two modules and that symmetry-restrained conformational
change underlies the functional cycle of the transporter. Our findings shed light
on mechanisms of redox-driven primary active transporters, and explain how
driving substances of different electric charges may drive similar transport
processes.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2006276117 
PMCID: PMC7733839
PMID: 33229520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


2. Gene. 2021 Jan 30;767:145268. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145268. Epub 2020 Nov 3.

A genomic analysis of osmotolerance in Staphylococcus aureus.

Casey D(1), Sleator RD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Munster Technological University,
Bishopstown Campus, Cork, Ireland.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Munster Technological University,
Bishopstown Campus, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: roy.sleator@cit.ie.

A key phenotypic characteristic of the Gram-positive bacterial pathogen,
Staphylococcus aureus, is its ability to grow in low aw environments. A homology 
transfer based approach, using the well characterised osmotic stress response
systems of Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli, was used to identify putative 
osmotolerance loci in Staphylococcus aureus ST772-MRSA-V. A total of 17 distinct 
putative hyper and hypo-osmotic stress response systems, comprising 78 genes,
were identified. The ST772-MRSA-V genome exhibits significant degeneracy in terms
of the osmotic stress response; with three copies of opuD, two copies each of
nhaK and mrp/mnh, and five copies of opp. Furthermore, regulation of
osmotolerance in ST772-MRSA-V appears to be mediated at the transcriptional,
translational, and post-translational levels.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145268 
PMID: 33157201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Elife. 2020 Jul 31;9. pii: e59407. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59407.

Structure and mechanism of the Mrp complex, an ancient cation/proton antiporter.

Steiner J(1), Sazanov L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.

Multiple resistance and pH adaptation (Mrp) antiporters are multi-subunit Na+ (or
K+)/H+ exchangers representing an ancestor of many essential redox-driven proton 
pumps, such as respiratory complex I. The mechanism of coupling between ion or
electron transfer and proton translocation in this large protein family is
unknown. Here, we present the structure of the Mrp complex from Anoxybacillus
flavithermus solved by cryo-EM at 3.0 Å resolution. It is a dimer of
seven-subunit protomers with 50 trans-membrane helices each. Surface charge
distribution within each monomer is remarkably asymmetric, revealing probable
proton and sodium translocation pathways. On the basis of the structure we
propose a mechanism where the coupling between sodium and proton translocation is
facilitated by a series of electrostatic interactions between a cation and key
charged residues. This mechanism is likely to be applicable to the entire family 
of redox proton pumps, where electron transfer to substrates replaces cation
movements.

© 2020, Steiner and Sazanov.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.59407 
PMCID: PMC7419157
PMID: 32735215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JS, LS No competing interests declared


4. Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 20;10(1):676. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-57546-1.

Genomic Survey of Salt Acclimation-Related Genes in the Halophilic Cyanobacterium
Euhalothece sp. Z-M001.

Yang HW(1), Song JY(1), Cho SM(1)(2), Kwon HC(3), Pan CH(3), Park YI(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
34134, Korea.
(2)Unit of Polar Genomics, Korea Polar Research Institute, Incheon, 21990, Korea.
(3)Natural Product Informatics Research Center, KIST Gangneung Institute of
Natural Products, Gangneung, 25451, Korea.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
34134, Korea. yipark@cnu.ac.kr.

Like other halophilic cyanobacterial genomes, the de novo-assembled genome of
Euhalothece sp. Z-M001 lacks genes encoding keto-carotenoid biosynthesis enzymes,
despite the presence of genes encoding carotenoid-binding proteins (CBPs).
Consistent with this, HPLC analysis of carotenoids identified β-carotene and
zeaxanthin as the dominant carotenoids. CBPs coexpressed with the zeaxanthin
biosynthesis gene increased the survival rates of Escherichia coli strains by
preventing antibiotic-induced accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
RNA-seq analysis of Euhalothece revealed that among various salt
resistance-related genes, those encoding the Na+ transporting multiple resistance
and pH adaptation (Mrp) systems, glycine betaine biosynthesis enzymes,
exopolysaccharide metabolic enzymes, and CBPs were highly upregulated, suggesting
their importance in hypersaline habitats. During the early phase of salt
deprivation, the amounts of β-carotene and zeaxanthin showed a negative
correlation with ROS content. Overall, we propose that in some halophilic
cyanobacteria, β-carotene and zeaxanthin, rather than keto-carotenoids, serve as 
the major chromophores for CBPs, which in turn act as effective antioxidants.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-57546-1 
PMCID: PMC6971039
PMID: 31959801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Dec 3;116(49):24574-24582. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1905491116. Epub 2019 Nov 19.

RNA base-pairing complexity in living cells visualized by correlated chemical
probing.

Mustoe AM(1), Lama NN(1), Irving PS(1), Olson SW(1), Weeks KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
weeks@unc.edu.

RNA structure and dynamics are critical to biological function. However,
strategies for determining RNA structure in vivo are limited, with established
chemical probing and newer duplex detection methods each having deficiencies.
Here we convert the common reagent dimethyl sulfate into a useful probe of all 4 
RNA nucleotides. Building on this advance, we introduce PAIR-MaP, which uses
single-molecule correlated chemical probing to directly detect base-pairing
interactions in cells. PAIR-MaP has superior resolution compared to alternative
experiments, can resolve multiple sets of pairing interactions for structurally
dynamic RNAs, and enables highly accurate structure modeling, including of RNAs
containing multiple pseudoknots and extensively bound by proteins. Application of
PAIR-MaP to human RNase MRP and 2 bacterial messenger RNA 5' untranslated regions
reveals functionally important and complex structures undetected by prior
analyses. PAIR-MaP is a powerful, experimentally concise, and broadly applicable 
strategy for directly visualizing RNA base pairs and dynamics in cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1905491116 
PMCID: PMC6900531
PMID: 31744869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: A.M.M. is a
consultant to and K.M.W. is an advisor to and holds equity in Ribometrix, to
which correlated chemical probing technologies have been licensed.


6. Mol Cell. 2019 May 2;74(3):494-507.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.02.034. Epub
2019 Mar 28.

Endoribonucleolytic Cleavage of m6A-Containing RNAs by RNase P/MRP Complex.

Park OH(1), Ha H(1), Lee Y(1), Boo SH(1), Kwon DH(2), Song HK(2), Kim YK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Creative Research Initiatives Center for Molecular Biology of Translation,
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea; Division of Life Sciences,
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea.
(3)Creative Research Initiatives Center for Molecular Biology of Translation,
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea; Division of Life Sciences,
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
yk-kim@korea.ac.kr.

N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most abundant internal modification in RNAs and
plays regulatory roles in a variety of biological and physiological processes.
Despite its important roles, the molecular mechanism underlying m6A-mediated gene
regulation is poorly understood. Here, we show that m6A-containing RNAs are
subject to endoribonucleolytic cleavage via YTHDF2 (m6A reader protein), HRSP12
(adaptor protein), and RNase P/MRP (endoribonucleases). We demonstrate that
HRSP12 functions as an adaptor to bridge YTHDF2 and RNase P/MRP, eliciting rapid 
degradation of YTHDF2-bound RNAs. Transcriptome-wide analyses show that m6A RNAs 
that are preferentially targeted for endoribonucleolytic cleavage have an
HRSP12-binding site and a RNase P/MRP-directed cleavage site upstream and
downstream of the YTHDF2-binding site, respectively. We also find that a subset
of m6A-containing circular RNAs associates with YTHDF2 in an HRSP12-dependent
manner and is selectively downregulated by RNase P/MRP. Thus, our data expand the
known functions of RNase P/MRP to endoribonucleolytic cleavage of m6A RNAs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.02.034 
PMID: 30930054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Microbiol. 2018 Oct 25;9:2537. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02537. eCollection
2018.

Vibrio natriegens as Host for Expression of Multisubunit Membrane Protein
Complexes.

Schleicher L(1), Muras V(1), Claussen B(1), Pfannstiel J(2), Blombach B(3),
Dibrov P(4), Fritz G(1)(5), Steuber J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemical Engineering, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart,
Germany.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(5)Institute for Neuropathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau,
Germany.

Escherichia coli is a convenient host for the expression of proteins, but the
heterologous production of large membrane protein complexes often is hampered by 
the lack of specific accessory genes required for membrane insertion or cofactor 
assembly. In this study we introduce the non-pathogenic and fast-growing Vibrio
natriegens as a suitable expression host for membrane-bound proteins from Vibrio 
cholerae. We achieved production of the primary Na+ pump, the NADH:quinone
oxidoreductase (NQR), from V. cholerae in an active state, as indicated by
increased overall NADH:quinone oxidoreduction activity of membranes from the
transformed V. natriegens, and the sensitivity toward Ag+, a specific inhibitor
of the NQR. Complete assembly of V. cholerae NQR expressed in V. natriegens was
demonstrated by BN PAGE followed by activity staining. The secondary transport
system Mrp from V. cholerae, another membrane-bound multisubunit complex, was
also produced in V. natriegens in a functional state, as demonstrated by in vivo 
Li+ transport. V. natriegens is a promising expression host for the production of
membrane protein complexes from Gram-negative pathogens.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02537 
PMCID: PMC6209661
PMID: 30410475 


8. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Jan;111(1):31-45. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14137. Epub 2018 Oct 23.

Iron-sulfur cluster carrier proteins involved in the assembly of Escherichia coli
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I).

Burschel S(1), Kreuzer Decovic D(1)(2), Nuber F(1), Stiller M(1), Hofmann M(1),
Zupok A(3), Siemiatkowska B(4), Gorka M(4), Leimkühler S(3), Friedrich T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Institut für Biochemie, Albertstr. 21, D-79104,
Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM), University of
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)University of Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(4)Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476,
Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

The NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (respiratory complex I) is the main entry
point for electrons into the Escherichia coli aerobic respiratory chain. With its
sophisticated setup of 13 different subunits and 10 cofactors, it is anticipated 
that various chaperones are needed for its proper maturation. However, very
little is known about the assembly of E. coli complex I, especially concerning
the incorporation of the iron-sulfur clusters. To identify iron-sulfur cluster
carrier proteins possibly involved in the process, we generated knockout strains 
of NfuA, BolA, YajL, Mrp, GrxD and IbaG that have been reported either to be
involved in the maturation of mitochondrial complex I or to exert influence on
the clusters of bacterial complex. We determined the NADH and succinate oxidase
activities of membranes from the mutant strains to monitor the specificity of the
individual mutations for complex I. The deletion of NfuA, BolA and Mrp led to a
decreased stability and partially disturbed assembly of the complex as determined
by sucrose gradient centrifugation and native PAGE. EPR spectroscopy of
cytoplasmic membranes revealed that the BolA deletion results in the loss of the 
binuclear Fe/S cluster N1b.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14137 
PMID: 30251413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Apr;102(8):3765-3777. doi:
10.1007/s00253-018-8846-3. Epub 2018 Mar 3.

Role of the Group 2 Mrp sodium/proton antiporter in rapid response to high
alkaline shock in the alkaline- and salt-tolerant Dietzia sp. DQ12-45-1b.

Fang H(1), Qin XY(1), Zhang KD(1), Nie Y(2), Wu XL(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, People's Republic 
of China.
(2)College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, People's Republic 
of China. nieyong@pku.edu.cn.
(3)College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, People's Republic 
of China. xiaolei_wu@pku.edu.cn.

The six- and seven-subunit Na+/H+ antiporters (Mrp) are widely distributed in
bacteria. They are reported to be integral for pH homeostasis in alkaliphilic
bacteria when adapting to high pH environments. In this study, operons encoding
for the six-subunit Na+/H+ antiporters were found in the genomes of all studied
Dietzia strains, which have different alkaline-resistant abilities. Disruption of
the operon in the strain Dietzia sp. DQ12-45-1b which leads to declined growth in
presence of hypersaline and alkaline conditions suggested that the six-subunit
Na+/H+ antiporter played an important role in hypersaline and alkaline
resistance. Although the complexes DqMrp from DQ12-45-1b (strain with high
alkaline resistance) and DaMrp from D. alimentaria 72T (strain with low alkaline 
resistance) displayed Na+(Li+)/H+ antiport activities, they functioned optimally 
at different pH levels (9.0 for DQ12-45-1b and 8.0 for 72T). While both
antiporters functioned properly to protect Escherichia coli cells from salt
shock, only the DqMrp-containing strain survived the high alkaline shock.
Furthermore, real-time PCR results showed that the expression of mrpA and mrpD
induced only immediately after DQ12-45-1b cells were subjected to the alkaline
shock. These results suggested that the expression of DqMrp might be induced by a
pH gradient across the cell membrane, and DqMrp mainly functioned at an early
stage to respond to the alkaline shock.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-8846-3 
PMID: 29502180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Zentralbl Chir. 2017 Jun;142(3):297-305. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-120546. Epub 2017
Jun 22.

[Do General Surgeons Feel Adequately Prepared for the Complex Questions
Associated with the Handling of Multi-Resistant Pathogens? - Results of the MR2
Survey].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

May M(1), Spachmann PJ(2), Lebentrau S(3), Schumacher H(1), Gilfrich C(1),
Fritsche HM(2), Vetterlein M(4), Brookman-May S(5), Schostak M(6), Wagenlehner
FM(7), Burger M(2), Novotny A(8), Obermaier R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Klinik, St. Elisabeth-Klinikum Straubing, Deutschland.
(2)Urologische Klinik, Universität Regensburg, Caritas-Krankenhaus St. Josef,
Regensburg, Deutschland.
(3)Urologische Klinik, Medizinische Hochschule Brandenburg, Ruppiner Kliniken,
Neuruppin, Deutschland.
(4)Urologische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Deutschland.
(5)Urologische Klinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Deutschland.
(6)Urologische Klinik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Deutschland.
(7)Urologische Klinik, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Deutschland.
(8)Chirurgische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen
Universität München, Deutschland.
(9)Chirurgische Klinik, St. Elisabeth-Klinikum, Straubing, Deutschland.

Background At the present time, there is no evidence available as to the
knowledge of general surgeons regarding multi-resistant pathogens (MRP) and the
rational use of antibiotic medication (antibiotic stewardship/ABS) compared with 
physicians from other disciplines. Methods As part of the MR2 survey
(Multiinstitutional Reconnaissance of practice with MultiResistant bacteria - a
survey focussing on German hospitals), a questionnaire comprising 4 + 35 items
was distributed to urologists, internists, gynaecologists and general surgeons in
18 hospitals. Multivariate regression models were applied to assess the impact of
each discipline affiliation on predefined endpoints. Results 456 evaluable
surveys were analysed. The response rate of surgeons (156/330; 47%) and
physicians from other disciplines (300/731; 41%) did not differ significantly.
Based on their self-assessment, surgeons indicated a significantly lower
certainty regarding the correct choice of dose, frequency and duration of
antibiotic treatment (p = 0.005), the decision between intravenous or oral
application (p = 0.005), as well as the accurate interpretation of
microbiological reports (p = 0.023). Both surgeons and doctors from other
disciplines rated their knowledge of ABS as limited. An insignificant difference 
was found between surgeons and non-surgeons regarding the knowledge of E. coli
resistance against Ciprofloxacin in their own hospital (27.6 vs. 35.3% estimated 
the correct category; p = 0.114), with 64% of surgeons underestimating the local 
resistance rates. Both physician groups assumed that the frequent use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics is substantially responsible for the increase in MRP. 
However, in the given case study of a highly symptomatic female patient with
uncomplicated urinary tract infection, both physician groups were almost equally 
likely to propose treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic (34.0 vs. 29.3%;
p = 0.331). Based on the results of the multivariate models, there were no
significant differences between surgeons and non-surgeons with regard to both the
attendance of training courses related to MRP/ABS over the past 12 months and the
quality of discharge summaries in their hospitals regarding the correct listing
of MRP. Conclusion In due consideration of the results of the MR2 survey,
mandatory ABS programs should be implemented in hospitals, including regular
training of physicians regardless of their discipline.

Publisher: Hintergrund Es liegen derzeit keine Untersuchungen darüber vor,
welchen Kenntnisstand Chirurgen im Vergleich mit Nichtchirurgen über
multiresistente Erreger (MRE) und den rationalen Einsatz von Antibiotika haben
(Antibiotic Stewardship/ABS). Methode Im Rahmen der MR2-Studie
(Multiinstitutional Reconnaissance of practice with MultiResistant bacteria – a
survey focussing on German hospitals) wurde ein Fragebogen mit 4 + 35 Punkten in 
18 deutschen Krankenhäusern an Urologen, Internisten, Gynäkologen und Chirurgen
verteilt. Mit multivariaten logistischen Regressionsmodellen wurde der Einfluss
der Fachrichtung auf verschiedene prädeterminierte Endpunkte geprüft. Ergebnisse 
Es konnten 456 auswertbare Fragebögen analysiert werden, wobei sich die
Rücklaufquote bei Chirurgen (156/330, 47%) und Nichtchirurgen (300/731, 41%) nur 
insignifikant unterschied (p = 0,061). Chirurgen gaben in der Selbsteinschätzung 
im Vergleich mit Nichtchirurgen eine signifikant geringere Sicherheit bei der
korrekten Wahl von Dosierung, Frequenz und Dauer der Antibiotikagabe (p = 0,005),
der Entscheidung einer intravenösen vs. oralen Antibiotikaverordnung (p = 0,005) 
sowie der korrekten Interpretation der mikrobiologischen Befunde (p = 0,023) an. 
Sowohl Chirurgen als auch Nichtchirurgen schätzten ihr Wissen zu ABS als gering
ein. Die Kenntnis der lokalen E.-coli-Resistenz gegen Ciprofloxacin unterschied
sich zwischen Chirurgen und Nichtchirurgen nur insignifikant (27,6 vs. 35,3%
waren in der richtigen Kategorie; p = 0,114), wobei 64% der Chirurgen diese
lokalen Resistenzen unterschätzten. Beide Gruppen sahen in dem häufigen Einsatz
von Breitspektrumantibiotika ein wesentliches Problem, das für die Zunahme von
MRE verantwortlich ist. Andererseits wurde das gewählte Fallbeispiel einer stark 
symptomatischen Patientin mit unkomplizierter Harnwegsinfektion von beiden
Gruppen ähnlich häufig mit einem Breitspektrumantibiotikum behandelt (34,0 vs.
29,3%; p = 0,331). Gemäß der multivariaten Modelle besuchten Chirurgen im
Vergleich zu Nichtchirurgen in den letzten 12 Monaten nicht häufiger eine
Weiterbildungsveranstaltung zum Thema der MRE/ABS und gaben auch keine bessere
Qualität ihrer Klinikepikrisen hinsichtlich der exakten Auflistung von MRE an.
Schlussfolgerungen Es sollten in den Kliniken obligat ABS-Programme implementiert
werden, die u. a. eine regelmäßige Fortbildung der Kollegen unabhängig von ihrer 
Fachrichtungen vorsehen.
Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-120546 
PMID: 28641352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Interessenkonflikt: PD Dr. S. Brookman-May
arbeitet als Director Regional Therapeutic Area Expert Oncology (EMEA) im Bereich
Research and Development des Pharmaunternehmens Janssen-Cilag GmbH, was jedoch zu
keiner Beeinflussung der Studie führte. Die weiteren Autoren dieser Arbeit geben 
an, dass kein Interessenkonflikt besteht. Dieser Beitrag beinhaltet keine Studien
an Menschen oder Tieren.


############# ((nac) AND (csiR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Syst Biol. 2017 Jan 6;11(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12918-016-0376-y.

Coordinated regulation of acid resistance in Escherichia coli.

Aquino P(1)(2), Honda B(1), Jaini S(1), Lyubetskaya A(3), Hosur K(1)(2), Chiu
JG(2), Ekladious I(2), Hu D(2), Jin L(2), Sayeg MK(2), Stettner AI(2), Wang J(2),
Wong BG(2), Wong WS(2), Alexander SL(2), Ba C(2), Bensussen SI(2), Bernstein
DB(2), Braff D(2), Cha S(2), Cheng DI(2), Cho JH(2), Chou K(2), Chuang J(2),
Gastler DE(2), Grasso DJ(2), Greifenberger JS(2), Guo C(2), Hawes AK(2), Israni
DV(2), Jain SR(2), Kim J(2), Lei J(2), Li H(2), Li D(2), Li Q(2), Mancuso CP(2), 
Mao N(2), Masud SF(2), Meisel CL(2), Mi J(2), Nykyforchyn CS(2), Park M(2),
Peterson HM(2), Ramirez AK(2), Reynolds DS(2), Rim NG(2), Saffie JC(2), Su H(2), 
Su WR(2), Su Y(2), Sun M(2), Thommes MM(2), Tu T(2), Varongchayakul N(2), Wagner 
TE(2), Weinberg BH(2), Yang R(2), Yaroslavsky A(2), Yoon C(2), Zhao Y(2),
Zollinger AJ(2), Stringer AM(4), Foster JW(5), Wade J(4)(6), Raman S(5), Broude
N(1), Wong WW(1), Galagan JE(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(2)BE605 Course, Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics program, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(4)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of South Alabama College
of Medicine, Mobile, AL, 36688, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University at Albany, Albany, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
jgalag@bu.edu.
(8)Bioinformatics program, Boston University, Boston, USA. jgalag@bu.edu.
(9)National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Boston University, Boston,
USA. jgalag@bu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Enteric Escherichia coli survives the highly acidic environment of
the stomach through multiple acid resistance (AR) mechanisms. The most effective 
system, AR2, decarboxylates externally-derived glutamate to remove cytoplasmic
protons and excrete GABA. The first described system, AR1, does not require an
external amino acid. Its mechanism has not been determined. The regulation of the
multiple AR systems and their coordination with broader cellular metabolism has
not been fully explored.
RESULTS: We utilized a combination of ChIP-Seq and gene expression analysis to
experimentally map the regulatory interactions of four TFs: nac, ntrC, ompR, and 
csiR. Our data identified all previously in vivo confirmed direct interactions
and revealed several others previously inferred from gene expression data. Our
data demonstrate that nac and csiR directly modulate AR, and leads to a
regulatory network model in which all four TFs participate in coordinating acid
resistance, glutamate metabolism, and nitrogen metabolism. This model predicts a 
novel mechanism for AR1 by which the decarboxylation enzymes of AR2 are used with
internally derived glutamate. This hypothesis makes several testable predictions 
that we confirmed experimentally.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the regulatory network underlying AR is
complex and deeply interconnected with the regulation of GABA and glutamate
metabolism, nitrogen metabolism. These connections underlie and experimentally
validated model of AR1 in which the decarboxylation enzymes of AR2 are used with 
internally derived glutamate.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-016-0376-y 
PMCID: PMC5217608
PMID: 28061857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Feb;51(3):799-811.

Multiple stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex sigma
S-dependent csiD-ygaF-gabDTP operon in Escherichia coli.

Metzner M(1), Germer J, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The csiD-ygaF-gabDTP region in the Escherichia coli genome represents a cluster
of sigma S-controlled genes. Here, we investigated promoter structures, sigma
factor dependencies, potential co-regulation and environmental regulatory
patterns for all of these genes. We find that this region constitutes a complex
operon with expression being controlled by three differentially regulated
promoters: (i) csiDp, which affects the expression of all five genes, is
cAMP-CRP/sigma S-dependent and activated exclusively upon carbon starvation and
stationary phase; (ii) gabDp1, which is sigma S-dependent and exhibits multiple
stress induction like sigma S itself; and (iii) gabDp2[previously suggested by
Schneider, B.L., Ruback, S., Kiupakis, A.K., Kasbarian, H., Pybus, C., and
Reitzer, L. (2002) J. Bacteriol. 184: 6976-6986], which appears to be Nac/sigma
70-controlled and to respond to poor nitrogen sources. In addition, we identify a
novel repressor, CsiR, which modulates csiDp activity in a temporal manner during
early stationary phase. Finally, we propose a physiological role for sigma
S-controlled GabT/D-mediated gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) catabolism and glutamate 
accumulation in general stress adaptation. This physiological role is reflected
by the activation of the operon-internal gabDp1 promoter under the different
conditions that also induce sigma S, which include shifts to acidic pH or high
osmolarity as well as starvation or stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03867.x 
PMID: 14731280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nadR) AND (nadC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Metab Eng. 2021 Sep;67:164-172. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2021.06.007. Epub 2021 Jun
27.

Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for quinolinic acid production by
assembling L-aspartate oxidase and quinolinate synthase as an enzyme complex.

Zhu F(1), Peña M(1), Bennett GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA.
(2)Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA;
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
TX, 77005, USA. Electronic address: gbennett@rice.edu.

Quinolinic acid (QA) is a key intermediate of nicotinic acid (Niacin) which is an
essential human nutrient and widely used in food and pharmaceutical industries.
In this study, a quinolinic acid producer was constructed by employing
comprehensive engineering strategies. Firstly, the quinolinic acid production was
improved by deactivation of NadC (to block the consumption pathway), NadR (to
eliminate the repression of L-aspartate oxidase and quinolinate synthase), and
PtsG (to slow the glucose utilization rate and achieve a more balanced
metabolism, and also to increase the availability of the precursor
phosphoenolpyruvate). Further modifications to enhance quinolinic acid production
were investigated by increasing the oxaloacetate pool through overproduction of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and deactivation of acetate-producing pathway
enzymes. Moreover, quinolinic acid production was accelerated by assembling NadB 
and NadA as an enzyme complex with the help of peptide-peptide interaction
peptides RIAD and RIDD, which resulted in up to 3.7 g/L quinolinic acid being
produced from 40 g/L glucose in shake-flask cultures. A quinolinic acid producer 
was constructed in this study, and these results lay a foundation for further
engineering of microbial cell factories to efficiently produce quinolinic acid
and subsequently convert this product to nicotinic acid for industrial
applications.

Copyright © 2021 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2021.06.007 
PMID: 34192552 


############# ((nanR) AND (nanR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. ACS Synth Biol. 2021 Aug 20;10(8):1920-1930. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00139. Epub
2021 Aug 9.

Development of a N-Acetylneuraminic Acid-Based Sensing and Responding Switch for 
Orthogonal Gene Regulation in Cyanobacterial Synechococcus Strains.

Sun X(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), Zhang F(1)(2)(3), Sun T(1)(2)(4)(5), Chen
L(1)(2)(3), Zhang W(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synthetic Microbiology, School of Chemical Engineering and
Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, People's Republic of China.
(2)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering, Ministry of Education of China, Tianjin 300072, People's Republic
of China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin
300072, People's Republic of China.
(4)Center for Biosafety Research and Strategy, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, People's Republic of China.
(5)Law School of Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, People's Republic of China.

Advances in synthetic biology have allowed photosynthetic cyanobacteria as
promising "green cell factories" for sustainable production of biofuels and
biochemicals. However, a limited of genetic switches developed in cyanobacteria
restrict the complex and orthogonal metabolic regulation. In addition, suitable
and controllable switches sensing and responding to specific inducers would allow
for the separation of cellular growth and expression of exogenous genes or
pathways that cause metabolic burden or toxicity. Here in this study, we
developed a genetic switch repressed by NanR and induced by N-acetylneuraminic
acid (Neu5Ac) in a fast-growing cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus UTEX 2973 
along with its highly homologous strain S. elongatus PCC 7942. First, nanR from
Escherichia coli and a previously optimized cognate promoter PJ23119H10 were
introduced into Syn2973 to control the expression of the reporter gene lacZ
encoding β-galactosidase, achieving induction with negligible leakage. Second,
the switch was systemically optimized to reach ∼738-fold induction by fine-tuning
the expression level of NanR and introducing additional transporter of Neu5Ac.
Finally, the orthogonality between the NanR/Neu5Ac switch and
theophylline-responsive riboregulator was investigated, achieving a coordinated
regulation or binary regulation toward the target gene. Our work here provided a 
new switch for transcriptional control and orthogonal regulation strategies in
cyanobacteria, which would promote the metabolic regulation for the
cyanobacterial chassis in the future.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00139 
PMID: 34370452 


2. Nat Commun. 2021 Mar 31;12(1):1988. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22253-6.

Mechanism of NanR gene repression and allosteric induction of bacterial sialic
acid metabolism.

Horne CR(#)(1), Venugopal H(#)(2), Panjikar S(3)(4), Wood DM(1), Henrickson A(5),
Brookes E(6), North RA(1), Murphy JM(7)(8), Friemann R(9)(10), Griffin MDW(11),
Ramm G(2)(4), Demeler B(5)(6), Dobson RCJ(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Clive and Vera Ramaciotti Centre for Cryo-Electron Microscopy, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(3)Australian Synchrotron, ANSTO, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Lethbridge,
Lethbridge, AB, Canada.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(7)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(8)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(9)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(10)Centre for Antibiotic Resistance Research (CARe), University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(11)Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, Department of
Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(12)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University
of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand. renwick.dobson@canterbury.ac.nz.
(13)Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, Department of
Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia. renwick.dobson@canterbury.ac.nz.
(#)Contributed equally

Bacteria respond to environmental changes by inducing transcription of some genes
and repressing others. Sialic acids, which coat human cell surfaces, are a
nutrient source for pathogenic and commensal bacteria. The Escherichia coli
GntR-type transcriptional repressor, NanR, regulates sialic acid metabolism, but 
the mechanism is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that three NanR dimers bind a
(GGTATA)3-repeat operator cooperatively and with high affinity. Single-particle
cryo-electron microscopy structures reveal the DNA-binding domain is reorganized 
to engage DNA, while three dimers assemble in close proximity across the
(GGTATA)3-repeat operator. Such an interaction allows cooperative protein-protein
interactions between NanR dimers via their N-terminal extensions. The effector,
N-acetylneuraminate, binds NanR and attenuates the NanR-DNA interaction. The
crystal structure of NanR in complex with N-acetylneuraminate reveals a domain
rearrangement upon N-acetylneuraminate binding to lock NanR in a conformation
that weakens DNA binding. Our data provide a molecular basis for the regulation
of bacterial sialic acid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-22253-6 
PMCID: PMC8012715
PMID: 33790291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biosci Rep. 2020 Jun 26;40(6). pii: BSR20200927. doi: 10.1042/BSR20200927.

The putative Escherichia coli dehydrogenase YjhC metabolises two dehydrated forms
of N-acetylneuraminate produced by some sialidases.

Kentache T(1), Thabault L(2), Peracchi A(1)(3), Frédérick R(2), Bommer GT(1)(4), 
Van Schaftingen E(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Chemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels,
B-1200, Belgium.
(2)Medicinal Chemistry Research Group (CMFA), Louvain Drug Research Institute
(LDRI), UCLouvain, Brussels, B-1200, Belgium.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability,
University of Parma, Parma 43124, Italy.
(4)Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), UCLouvain,
Brussels, B-1200, Belgium.

Homologues of the putative dehydrogenase YjhC are found in operons involved in
the metabolism of N-acetylneuraminate (Neu5Ac) or related compounds. We observed 
that purified recombinant YjhC forms Neu5Ac from two dehydrated forms of this
compound, 2,7-anhydro-N-acetylneuraminate (2,7-AN) and
2-deoxy-2,3-didehydro-N-acetylneuraminate (2,3-EN) that are produced during the
degradation of sialoconjugates by some sialidases. The conversion of 2,7-AN into 
Neu5Ac is reversible and reaches its equilibrium when the ratio of 2,7-AN to
Neu5Ac is ≈1/6. The conversion of 2,3-EN is irreversible, leading to a mixture of
Neu5Ac and 2,7-AN. NMR analysis of the reaction catalysed by YjhC on 2,3-EN
indicated that Neu5Ac was produced as the α-anomer. All conversions require NAD+ 
as a cofactor, which is regenerated in the reaction. They appear to involve the
formation of keto (presumably 4-keto) intermediates of 2,7-AN, 2,3-EN and Neu5Ac,
which were detected by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). The
proposed reaction mechanism is reminiscent of the one catalysed by family 4
β-glycosidases, which also use NAD+ as a cofactor. Both 2,7-AN and 2,3-EN support
the growth of Escherichia coli provided the repressor NanR, which negatively
controls the expression of the yjhBC operons, has been inactivated. Inactivation 
of either YjhC or YjhB in NanR-deficient cells prevents the growth on 2,7-AN and 
2,3-EN. This confirms the role of YjhC in 2,7-AN and 2,3-EN metabolism and
indicates that transport of 2,7-AN and 2,3-EN is carried out by YjhB, which is
homologous to the Neu5Ac transporter NanT.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20200927 
PMCID: PMC7315737
PMID: 32542330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proteins. 2020 May;88(5):654-668. doi: 10.1002/prot.25846. Epub 2019 Nov 21.

On the structure and function of Escherichia coli YjhC: An oxidoreductase
involved in bacterial sialic acid metabolism.

Horne CR(1), Kind L(2), Davies JS(1), Dobson RCJ(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Human pathogenic and commensal bacteria have evolved the ability to scavenge
host-derived sialic acids and subsequently degrade them as a source of nutrition.
Expression of the Escherichia coli yjhBC operon is controlled by the repressor
protein nanR, which regulates the core machinery responsible for the import and
catabolic processing of sialic acid. The role of the yjhBC encoded proteins is
not known-here, we demonstrate that the enzyme YjhC is an
oxidoreductase/dehydrogenase involved in bacterial sialic acid degradation.
First, we demonstrate in vivo using knockout experiments that YjhC is broadly
involved in carbohydrate metabolism, including that of N-acetyl-d-glucosamine,
N-acetyl-d-galactosamine and N-acetylneuraminic acid. Differential scanning
fluorimetry demonstrates that YjhC binds N-acetylneuraminic acid and its lactone 
variant, along with NAD(H), which is consistent with its role as an
oxidoreductase. Next, we solved the crystal structure of YjhC in complex with the
NAD(H) cofactor to 1.35 Å resolution. The protein fold belongs to the
Gfo/Idh/MocA protein family. The dimeric assembly observed in the crystal form is
confirmed through solution studies. Ensemble refinement reveals a flexible loop
region that may play a key role during catalysis, providing essential contacts to
stabilize the substrate-a unique feature to YjhC among closely related
structures. Guided by the structure, in silico docking experiments support the
binding of sialic acid and several common derivatives in the binding pocket,
which has an overall positive charge distribution. Taken together, our results
verify the role of YjhC as a bona fide oxidoreductase/dehydrogenase and provide
the first evidence to support its involvement in sialic acid metabolism.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25846 
PMID: 31697432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2018 Jul;115(7):1855-1865. doi: 10.1002/bit.26586. Epub 2018
Apr 6.

Development of N-acetylneuraminic acid responsive biosensors based on the
transcriptional regulator NanR.

Peters G(1), De Paepe B(1), De Wannemaeker L(1), Duchi D(1), Maertens J(1),
Lammertyn J(2), De Mey M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Synthetic Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)BIOSYST-MeBioS, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Transcriptional biosensors have various applications in metabolic engineering,
including dynamic pathway control and high-throughput screening of combinatorial 
strain libraries. Previously, various biosensors have been created from naturally
occurring transcription factors (TFs), largely relying on native sequences
without the possibility to modularly optimize their response curve. The lack of
design and engineering techniques thus greatly hinders the development of custom 
biosensors. In view of the intended application this is detrimental. In contrast,
a bottom-up approach to design tailor-made biosensors was pursued here. Novel
biosensors were created that respond to N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac), an
important sugar moiety with various biological functions, by employing native and
engineered promoters that interact with the TF NanR. This bottom-up approach,
whereby various tuned modules, e.g., the ribosome binding site (RBS) controlling 
NanR translation can be combined, enabled the reliable engineering of various
response curve characteristics. The latter was validated by testing these
biosensors in combination with various Neu5Ac-producing pathways, which allowed
to produce up to 1.4 ± 0.4 g/L extracellular Neu5Ac. In this way, the repertoire 
of biosensors was expanded with seven novel functional Neu5Ac-responsive
biosensors.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.26586 
PMID: 29532902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 May 4;46(8):3921-3936. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky138.

Single-target regulators form a minor group of transcription factors in
Escherichia coli K-12.

Shimada T(1), Ogasawara H(2)(3), Ishihama A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.
(2)Shinshu University, Research Center for Supports to Advanced Science, Division
of Gene Research, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan.
(3)Shinshu University, Research Center for Fungal and Microbial Dynamism,
Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan.
(4)Hosei University, Micro-Nano Technology Research Center, Koganei, Tokyo
184-8584, Japan.

The identification of regulatory targets of all TFs is critical for understanding
the entire network of the genome regulation. The lac regulon of Escherichia coli 
K-12 W3110 is composed of the lacZYA operon and its repressor lacI gene, and has 
long been recognized as the seminal model of transcription regulation in bacteria
with only one highly preferred target. After the Genomic SELEX screening in vitro
of more than 200 transcription factors (TFs) from E. coli K-12, however, we found
that most TFs regulate multiple target genes. With respect to the number of
regulatory targets, a total of these 200 E. coli TFs form a hierarchy ranging
from a single target to as many as 1000 targets. Here we focus a total of 13
single-target TFs, 9 known TFs (BetI, KdpE, LacI, MarR, NanR, RpiR, TorR, UlaR
and UxuR) and 4 uncharacterized TFs (YagI, YbaO, YbiH and YeaM), altogether
forming only a minor group of TFs in E. coli. These single-target TFs were
classified into three groups based on their functional regulation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky138 
PMCID: PMC5934670
PMID: 29529243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2015 Feb;362(4). doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnu056. Epub 2014 Dec
11.

A GntR-type transcriptional repressor controls sialic acid utilization in
Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003.

Egan M(1), O'Connell Motherway M(1), van Sinderen D(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Microbiology and Alimentary Pharmabiotic Centre, University College 
Cork, Western Road, Cork, Ireland.
(2)School of Microbiology and Alimentary Pharmabiotic Centre, University College 
Cork, Western Road, Cork, Ireland d.vansinderen@ucc.ie.

Bifidobacterium breve strains are numerically prevalent among the gut microbiota 
of healthy, breast-fed infants. The metabolism of sialic acid, a ubiquitous
monosaccharide in the infant and adult gut, by B. breve UCC2003 is dependent on a
large gene cluster, designated the nan/nag cluster. This study describes the
transcriptional regulation of the nan/nag cluster and thus sialic acid metabolism
in B. breve UCC2003. Insertion mutagenesis and transcriptome analysis revealed
that the nan/nag cluster is regulated by a GntR family transcriptional repressor,
designated NanR. Crude cell extract of Escherichia coli EC101 in which the nanR
gene had been cloned and overexpressed was shown to bind to two promoter regions 
within this cluster, each of which containing an imperfect inverted repeat that
is believed to act as the NanR operator sequence. Formation of the DNA-NanR
complex is prevented in the presence of sialic acid, which we had previously
shown to induce transcription of this gene cluster.

© FEMS 2014. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnu056 
PMID: 25688064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2013 Oct;195(20):4689-701. doi: 10.1128/JB.00692-13. Epub 2013 Aug
9.

Control of the Escherichia coli sialoregulon by transcriptional repressor NanR.

Kalivoda KA(1), Steenbergen SM, Vimr ER.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

NanR, one of >8,500 GntR superfamily helix-turn-helix transcriptional regulators,
controls expression of the genes required for catabolism of sialic acids in
Escherichia coli. It is predicted to do the same in related bacteria harboring
orthologs of nanR. The sialic acids are a family of over 40 naturally occurring
nine-carbon keto-sugar acids found mainly in the animal lineage, which includes
starfish to humans in the deuterostome lineage. Sialic acids function in
development, immunity, protein localization and stability, and homeostasis. They 
also serve as microbial carbon and nitrogen sources and ligands for cell
recognition during host colonization. The importance of microbial sialic acid
metabolism for host-microbe interactions has made it a target for therapeutic
development. Exploiting this target depends on understanding sialometabolic
pathways in a wide range of evolutionarily distinct bacteria. Here, we show by
transcriptome, genetic, and biochemical analyses that the most common sialic
acid, N-acetylneuraminate, induces the nanATEK-yhcH, yjhATS (nanCMS), and yjhBC
operons by directly inactivating NanR, converting the predominantly dimeric form 
of the repressor to an inactive monomer of approximately 30-kDa. Additionally,
other results identify critical amino acid residues and nucleotides in the
regulator and operator, respectively. The combined results better define how
sialic acids, acting through NanR, affect the metabolic flux of an important
group of host-derived metabolites. Thus, E. coli serves as a valuable model for
understanding sialocatabolic pathways in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00692-13 
PMCID: PMC3807447
PMID: 23935044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32026-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.266619. Epub
2011 Jul 15.

SlyA protein activates fimB gene expression and type 1 fimbriation in Escherichia
coli K-12.

McVicker G(1), Sun L, Sohanpal BK, Gashi K, Williamson RA, Plumbridge J,
Blomfield IC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury CT2 7NJ, United Kingdom.

We have demonstrated that SlyA activates fimB expression and hence type 1
fimbriation, a virulence factor in Escherichia coli. SlyA is shown to bind to two
operator sites (O(SA1) and O(SA2)), situated between 194 and 167 base pairs
upstream of the fimB transcriptional start site. fimB expression is derepressed
in an hns mutant and diminished by a slyA mutation in the presence of H-NS only. 
H-NS binds to multiple sites in the promoter region, including two sites (H-NS2
and H-NS3) that overlap O(SA1) and O(SA2), respectively. Mutations that disrupt
either O(SA1) or O(SA2) eliminate or reduce the activating effect of SlyA but
have different effects on the level of expression. We interpret these results as 
reflecting the relative competition between SlyA and H-NS binding. Moreover we
show that SlyA is capable of displacing H-NS from its binding sites in vitro. We 
suggest SlyA binding prevents H-NS binding to H-NS2 and H-NS3 and the subsequent 
oligomerization of H-NS necessary for full inhibition of fimB expression. In
addition, we show that SlyA activates fimB expression independently of two other 
known regulators of fimB expression, NanR and NagC. It is demonstrated that the
rarely used UUG initiation codon limits slyA expression and that low SlyA levels 
limit fimB expression. Furthermore, Western blot analysis shows that cells grown 
in rich-defined medium contain ~1000 SlyA dimers per cell whereas those grown in 
minimal medium contain >20% more SlyA. This study extends our understanding of
the role that SlyA plays in the host-bacterial relationship.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.266619 
PMCID: PMC3173223
PMID: 21768111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2010 May;192(9):2285-93. doi: 10.1128/JB.00079-10. Epub 2010 Feb 26.

A novel sialic acid utilization and uptake system in the periodontal pathogen
Tannerella forsythia.

Roy S(1), Douglas CW, Stafford GP.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry, Claremont
Crescent, University of Sheffield, S102TA Sheffield, United Kingdom.

Tannerella forsythia is a key contributor to periodontitis, but little is known
of its virulence mechanisms. In this study we have investigated the role of
sialic acid in biofilm growth of this periodontal pathogen. Our data show that
biofilm growth of T. forsythia is stimulated by sialic acid, glycolyl sialic
acid, and sialyllactose, all three of which are common sugar moieties on a range 
of important host glycoproteins. We have also established that growth on
sialyllactose is dependent on the sialidase of T. forsythia since the sialidase
inhibitor oseltamivir suppresses growth on sialyllactose. The genome of T.
forsythia contains a sialic acid utilization locus, which also encodes a putative
inner membrane sialic acid permease (NanT), and we have shown this is functional 
when it is expressed in Escherichia coli. This genomic locus also contains a
putatively novel TonB-dependent outer membrane sialic acid transport system
(TF0033-TF0034). In complementation studies using an Escherichia coli strain
devoid of its outer membrane sialic acid transporters, the cloning and expression
of the TF0033-TF0034 genes enabled an E. coli nanR nanC ompR strain to utilize
sialic acid as the sole carbon and energy source. We have thus identified a novel
sialic acid uptake system that couples an inner membrane permease with a
TonB-dependent outer membrane transporter, and we propose to rename these novel
sialic acid uptake genes nanO and nanU, respectively. Taken together, these data 
indicate that sialic acid is a key growth factor for this little-characterized
oral pathogen and may be key to its physiology in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00079-10 
PMCID: PMC2863479
PMID: 20190043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((narL) AND (narL)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Jan;23(1):5-14. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15293. Epub 2020
Nov 10.

Sensing of O2 and nitrate by bacteria: alternative strategies for transcriptional
regulation of nitrate respiration by O2 and nitrate.

Unden G(1), Klein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, 55099, Germany.

Many bacteria are able to use O2 and nitrate as alternative electron acceptors
for respiration. Strategies for regulation in response to O2 and nitrate can vary
considerably. In the paradigmatic system of E. coli (and γ-proteobacteria),
regulation by O2 and nitrate is established by the O2 -sensor FNR and the
two-component system NarX-NarL (for nitrate regulation). Expression of narGHJI is
regulated by the binding of FNR and NarL to the promoter. A similar strategy by
individual regulation in response to O2 and nitrate is verified in many genera by
the use of various types of regulators. Otherwise, in the soil bacteria Bacillus 
subtilis (Firmicutes) and Streptomyces (Actinobacteria), nitrate respiration is
subject to anaerobic induction, without direct nitrate induction. In contrast,
the NreA-NreB-NreC two-component system of Staphylococcus (Firmicutes) performs
joint sensing of O2 and nitrate by interacting O2 and nitrate sensors. The O2
-sensor NreB phosphorylates the response regulator NreC to activate narGHJI
expression. NreC-P transmits the signal for anaerobiosis to the promoter. The
nitrate sensor NreA modulates NreB function by converting NreB in the absence of 
nitrate from the kinase to a phosphatase that dephosphorylates NreC-P. Thus,
widely different strategies for coordinating the response to O2 and nitrate have 
evolved in bacteria.

© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15293 
PMID: 33089915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biosens Bioelectron. 2020 Nov 15;168:112523. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112523.
Epub 2020 Aug 20.

A designed whole-cell biosensor for live diagnosis of gut inflammation through
nitrate sensing.

Woo SG(1), Moon SJ(2), Kim SK(3), Kim TH(1), Lim HS(3), Yeon GH(1), Sung BH(1),
Lee CH(2), Lee SG(4), Hwang JH(5), Lee DH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea;
Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea.
(3)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea.
(4)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: sglee@kribb.re.kr.
(5)Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea;
Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
coccs99@kribb.re.kr.
(6)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: dhlee@kribb.re.kr.

Microbes reprogrammed using advanced genetic circuits are envisaged as emerging
living diagnostics for a wide range of diseases and play key roles in regulating 
gut microbiota to treat disease-associated symptoms in a non-invasive manner.
Here, we developed a designer probiotic Escherichia coli that senses and responds
to nitrate, a biomarker of gut inflammation. To this end, we first employed the
NarX-NarL two-component regulatory system in E. coli to construct a
nitrate-responsive genetic circuit. Next, we optimized the nitrate biosensor for 
the best performance using measures of sensitivity and specificity. We then
introduced this genetic circuit into a probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917. We
demonstrated that the designed biosensor can sense elevated nitrate levels during
gut inflammation in mice with native gut microbiota. Moreover, using Boolean AND 
gate, we generated a genetically encoded biosensor for simultaneous sensing of
the thiosulfate and nitrate biomarkers, thus increasing the tool's specificity
for diagnosing gut inflammation. The nitrate-responsive genetic circuit will
enable new approaches for non-invasive diagnostics of inflammation-associated
diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112523 
PMID: 32871497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem J. 2020 Aug 14;477(15):2807-2820. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200408.

Activation by NarL at the Escherichia coli ogt promoter.

Ruanto P(1), Chismon DL(1), Hothersall J(1), Godfrey RE(1), Lee DJ(1)(2), Busby
SJW(1), Browning DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Infection and School of Biosciences, University 
of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, U.K.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Birmingham City
University, Birmingham B15 3TN, U.K.

The Escherichia coli NarX/NarL two-component response-regulator system regulates 
gene expression in response to nitrate ions and the NarL protein is a global
transcription factor, which activates transcript initiation at many target
promoters. One such target, the E. coli ogt promoter, which controls the
expression of an O6-alkylguanine-DNA-alkyltransferase, is dependent on NarL
binding to two DNA targets centred at positions -44.5 and -77.5 upstream from the
transcript start. Here, we describe ogt promoter derivatives that can be
activated solely by NarL binding either at position -44.5 or position -77.5. We
show that NarL can also activate the ogt promoter when located at position -67.5.
We present data to argue that NarL-dependent activation of transcript initiation 
at the ogt promoter results from a direct interaction between NarL and a
determinant in the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase α subunit.
Footprinting experiments show that, at the -44.5 promoter, NarL and the
C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase α subunit bind to opposite faces of
promoter DNA, suggesting an unusual mechanism of transcription activation. Our
work suggests new organisations for activator-dependent transcription at
promoters and future applications for biotechnology.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200408 
PMCID: PMC7419079
PMID: 32662815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 31;11:26. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00026. eCollection
2020.

Nitrate Metabolism Modulates Biosynthesis of Biofilm Components in Uropathogenic 
Escherichia coli and Acts as a Fitness Factor During Experimental Urinary Tract
Infection.

Martín-Rodríguez AJ(1), Rhen M(1)(2)(3), Melican K(1), Richter-Dahlfors A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Swedish Medical Nanoscience Center, Karolinska
Institutet, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Solna, Sweden.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), Department of
Molecular Biology, Umeå Centre for Microbial Research (UCMR), Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.

To successfully colonize a variety of environments, bacteria can coordinate
complex collective behaviors such as biofilm formation. To thrive in oxygen
limited niches, bacteria's versatile physiology enables the utilization of
alternative electron acceptors. Nitrate, the second most favorable electron
acceptor after oxygen, plays a prominent role in the physiology of uropathogenic 
Escherichia coli (UPEC) and is abundantly found in urine. Here we analyzed the
role of extracellular nitrate in the pathogenesis of the UPEC strain CFT073 with 
an initial focus on biofilm formation. Colony morphotyping in combination with
extensive mutational, transcriptional, and protein expression analyses of CFT073 
wild-type and mutants deficient in one or several nitrate reductases revealed an 
association between nitrate reduction and the biosynthesis of biofilm
extracellular matrix components. We identified a role for the nitrate response
regulator NarL in modulating expression of the biofilm master regulator CsgD. To 
analyze the role of nitrate reduction during infection in vivo, we tested
wild-type CFT073 and a nitrate reductase null mutant in an ascending urinary
tract infection (UTI) model. Individually, each strain colonized extensively,
suggesting that nitrate reduction is expendable during UTI. However, during
competitive co-infection, the strain incapable of nitrate reduction was strongly 
outcompeted. This suggests that nitrate reduction can be considered a
non-essential but advantageous fitness factor for UPEC pathogenesis. This implies
that UPEC rapidly adapts their metabolic needs to the microenvironment of
infected tissue. Collectively, this work demonstrates a unique association
between nitrate respiration, biofilm formation, and UPEC pathogenicity,
highlighting how the use of alternative electron acceptors enables bacterial
pathogens to adapt to challenging infectious microenvironments.

Copyright © 2020 Martín-Rodríguez, Rhen, Melican and Richter-Dahlfors.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00026 
PMCID: PMC7005491
PMID: 32082279 


5. Nat Chem Biol. 2020 Feb;16(2):179-187. doi: 10.1038/s41589-019-0429-9. Epub 2019 
Dec 16.

Artificial signaling in mammalian cells enabled by prokaryotic two-component
system.

Mazé A(1), Benenson Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel,
Switzerland. kobi.benenson@bsse.ethz.ch.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2020 Feb;16(2):110-111.

Augmenting live cells with new signal transduction capabilities is a key
objective in genetic engineering and synthetic biology. We showed earlier that
two-component signaling pathways could function in mammalian cells, albeit while 
losing their ligand sensitivity. Here, we show how to transduce small-molecule
ligands in a dose-dependent fashion into gene expression in mammalian cells using
two-component signaling machinery. First, we engineer mutually complementing
truncated mutants of a histidine kinase unable to dimerize and phosphorylate the 
response regulator. Next, we fuse these mutants to protein domains capable of
ligand-induced dimerization, which restores the phosphoryl transfer in a
ligand-dependent manner. Cytoplasmic ligands are transduced by facilitating
mutant dimerization in the cytoplasm, while extracellular ligands trigger
dimerization at the inner side of a plasma membrane. These findings point to the 
potential of two-component regulatory systems as enabling tools for orthogonal
signaling pathways in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41589-019-0429-9 
PMCID: PMC6982536
PMID: 31844302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2018 Sep 8;72:111-139. doi:
10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640. Epub 2018 Jun 13.

The Complex Rcs Regulatory Cascade.

Wall E(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; emails: erin.wall@nih.gov ,
majdalan@mail.nih.gov , gottesms@mail.nih.gov.

RcsB, a response regulator of the FixJ/NarL family, is at the center of a complex
network of regulatory inputs and outputs. Cell surface stress is sensed by an
outer membrane lipoprotein, RcsF, which regulates interactions of the inner
membrane protein IgaA, lifting negative regulation of a phosphorelay. In vivo
evidence supports a pathway in which histidine kinase RcsC transfers phosphate to
phosphotransfer protein RcsD, resulting in phosphorylation of RcsB. RcsB acts
either alone or in combination with RcsA to positively regulate capsule synthesis
and synthesis of small RNA (sRNA) RprA as well as other genes, and to negatively 
regulate motility. RcsB in combination with other FixJ/NarL auxiliary proteins
regulates yet other functions, independent of RcsB phosphorylation. Proper
expression of Rcs and its targets is critical for success of Escherichia coli
commensal strains, for proper development of biofilm, and for virulence in some
pathogens. New understanding of how the Rcs phosphorelay works provides insight
into the flexibility of the two-component system paradigm.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640 
PMID: 29897834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biosci. 2017 Dec;42(4):565-573.

Re-engineering the two-component systems as light-regulated in Escherichia coli.

Ma S(1), Luo S, Wu LI, Liang Z, Wu JR.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230000,
China.

Bacteria live in environments with dynamic changes. To sense and respond to
different external stimuli, bacteria make use of various sensor-response
circuits, called two-component systems (TCSs). A TCS comprises a histidine
protein kinase (HK) sensing environmental stimuli and a response regulator
protein (RR) regulating downstream genes. The two components are coupled via a
phosphorylation control mechanism. In a recent study, we adopted an optogenetics 
approach to re-engineer the sensor HKs in Escherichia coli as a light-sensing
fusion protein. We constructed a light-controllable HK by replacing the original 
signal-specific sensing domain of HK with the light-sensing domain of Cph1 from
Cyanobacteria Synechocystis, so that HK can be investigated by red light. Here,
we extended the study to other 16 HK-RR TCSs and constructed a library of
light-responsible HK-Cph1 chimeras. By taking the NarX-NarL system as an example,
we demonstrated the light responsiveness of the constructed chimera and
investigated the frequency response of the NarXNarL system. The constructed
library serves as a toolkit for future TCS study using optogenetics approach.

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-017-9711-8 
PMID: 29229875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nutrients. 2017 Feb 21;9(2). pii: E171. doi: 10.3390/nu9020171.

Hypoallergenic Variant of the Major Egg White Allergen Gal d 1 Produced by
Disruption of Cysteine Bridges.

Dhanapala P(1)(2)(3)(4), Withanage-Dona D(5), Tang ML(6)(7)(8), Doran T(9)(10),
Suphioglu C(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Neuro Allergy Research Laboratory (NARL), School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin
University, 75 Pigdons Road, Geelong 3216 VIC, Australia. dpathum@deakin.edu.au.
(2)Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL), Biosecurity Flagship, Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), 5 Portarlington Road,
East Geelong 3219 VIC, Australia. dpathum@deakin.edu.au.
(3)Poultry CRC, P.O. Box U242, University of New England, Armidale 2351 NSW,
Australia. dpathum@deakin.edu.au.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, 60 Fenwood Road, Boston, 02115 MA, USA. dpathum@deakin.edu.au.
(5)Neuro Allergy Research Laboratory (NARL), School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin
University, 75 Pigdons Road, Geelong 3216 VIC, Australia.
pdhanapala@bwh.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Royal Children's Hospital, 50 Flemington
Road, Parkville 3052 VIC, Australia. Mimi.Tang@rch.org.au.
(7)Allergy and Immune Disorders, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 50
Flemington Road, Parkville 3052 VIC, Australia. Mimi.Tang@rch.org.au.
(8)The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010 VIC, Australia.
Mimi.Tang@rch.org.au.
(9)Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL), Biosecurity Flagship, Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), 5 Portarlington Road,
East Geelong 3219 VIC, Australia. Timothy.Doran@csiro.au.
(10)Poultry CRC, P.O. Box U242, University of New England, Armidale 2351 NSW,
Australia. Timothy.Doran@csiro.au.
(11)Neuro Allergy Research Laboratory (NARL), School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin
University, 75 Pigdons Road, Geelong 3216 VIC, Australia.
cenk.suphioglu@deakin.edu.au.
(12)Poultry CRC, P.O. Box U242, University of New England, Armidale 2351 NSW,
Australia. cenk.suphioglu@deakin.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Gal d 1 (ovomucoid) is the dominant allergen in the chicken egg
white. Hypoallergenic variants of this allergen can be used in immunotherapy as
an egg allergy treatment approach. We hypothesised that disruption of two of the 
nine cysteine-cysteine bridges by site-directed mutagenesis will allow the
production of a hypoallergenic variant of the protein; Methods: Two cysteine
residues at C192 and C210 in domain III of the protein were mutated to alanine
using site-directed mutagenesis, to disrupt two separate cysteine-cysteine
bridges. The mutated and non-mutated proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli 
(E. coli) by induction with isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). The
expressed proteins were analysed using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and immunoblotting to confirm expression.
Immunoglobulin E (IgE) reactivity of the two proteins was analysed, by
immunoblotting, against a pool of egg-allergic patients' sera. A pool of
non-allergic patients' sera was also used in a separate blot as a negative
control; Results: Mutant Gal d 1 showed diminished IgE reactivity in the
immunoblot by showing lighter bands when compared to the non-mutated version,
although there was more of the mutant protein immobilised on the membrane when
compared to the wild-type protein. The non-allergic negative control showed no
bands, indicating an absence of non-specific binding of secondary antibody to the
proteins; Conclusion: Disruption of two cysteine bridges in domain III of Gal d 1
reduces IgE reactivity. Following downstream laboratory and clinical testing,
this mutant protein can be used in immunotherapy to induce tolerance to Gal d 1
and in egg allergy diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu9020171 
PMCID: PMC5331602
PMID: 28230769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Microbiology (Reading). 2017 Apr;163(4):584-594. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000445. Epub 
2017 Apr 18.

Regulation of the Escherichia coli ydhY-T operon in the presence of alternative
electron acceptors.

Awad A Al Ibrahim N(1)(2), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The Krebs Institute,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.
(2)Present address: General Administration of Laboratories and Quality Control,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Riyadh 11162, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The Escherichia coli K-12 ydhY-T operon, coding for a predicted oxidoreductase
complex, is activated under anaerobic conditions and repressed in the presence of
nitrate or nitrite. Anaerobic activation is mediated by the transcription factor 
FNR, and nitrate/nitrite repression is mediated by NarXL and NarQP. In vitro
transcription reactions revealed that the DNA upstream of ydhY-T contains
sufficient information for RNA polymerase alone to initiate transcription from
five locations. FNR severely inhibited synthesis of two of these transcripts
(located upstream of, and within, the FNR binding site) and activated the
FNR-dependent promoter previously identified in vivo. Enhanced expression of
ydhY-T in an hns mutant was consistent with the location of ydhY-T within a
promoter island and the FNR-independent transcription observed in vitro.
FNR-dependent transcription in vitro was decreased in the presence of NarL~P.
DNaseI footprinting indicated that FNR and NarL~P simultaneously bound at the
ydhY-T promoter region and that NarL~P-mediated repression was due to occupation 
of the 7-2-7 site located downstream of the FNR-dependent promoter. Expression of
ydhY-T during the anaerobic growth cycle was repressed when nitrate was present
but less so in the presence of nitrite. In vivo transcription measurements
indicated that the alternative electron acceptors, DMSO and fumarate, could also 
lower ydhY-T expression, whereas trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) permitted high
expression. Therefore, expression of ydhY-T is subject to complex regulation in
response to electron acceptor availability that involves at least three
transcription factors, FNR (anaerobic activation), NarL~P (nitrate repression)
and H-NS (repression in the absence of an antagonist; e.g. FNR).

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000445 
PMID: 28218056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Microbiol. 2017 May;104(4):580-594. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13647. Epub 2017 Mar 1.

Regulation of nrf operon expression in pathogenic enteric bacteria: sequence
divergence reveals new regulatory complexity.

Godfrey RE(1), Lee DJ(1)(2), Busby SJW(1), Browning DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Birmingham City
University, Birmingham, B15 3TN, UK.

The Escherichia coli K-12 nrf operon encodes a periplasmic nitrite reductase, the
expression of which is driven from a single promoter, pnrf. Expression from pnrf 
is activated by the FNR transcription factor in response to anaerobiosis and
further increased in response to nitrite by the response regulator proteins, NarL
and NarP. FNR-dependent transcription is suppressed by the binding of two
nucleoid associated proteins, IHF and Fis. As Fis levels increase in cells grown 
in rich medium, the positioning of its binding site, overlapping the promoter -10
element, ensures that pnrf is sharply repressed. Here, we investigate the
expression of the nrf operon promoter from various pathogenic enteric bacteria.
We show that pnrf from enterohaemorrhagic E. coli is more active than its K-12
counterpart, exhibits substantial FNR-independent activity and is insensitive to 
nutrient quality, due to an improved -10 element. We also demonstrate that the
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium core promoter is more active than
previously thought, due to differences around the transcription start site, and
that its expression is repressed by downstream sequences. We identify the CsrA
RNA binding protein as being responsible for this, and show that CsrA
differentially regulates the E. coli K-12 and Salmonella nrf operons.

© 2017 The Authors Molecular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13647 
PMCID: PMC5434802
PMID: 28211111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((narP) AND (narP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2017 May;104(4):580-594. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13647. Epub 2017 Mar 1.

Regulation of nrf operon expression in pathogenic enteric bacteria: sequence
divergence reveals new regulatory complexity.

Godfrey RE(1), Lee DJ(1)(2), Busby SJW(1), Browning DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Birmingham City
University, Birmingham, B15 3TN, UK.

The Escherichia coli K-12 nrf operon encodes a periplasmic nitrite reductase, the
expression of which is driven from a single promoter, pnrf. Expression from pnrf 
is activated by the FNR transcription factor in response to anaerobiosis and
further increased in response to nitrite by the response regulator proteins, NarL
and NarP. FNR-dependent transcription is suppressed by the binding of two
nucleoid associated proteins, IHF and Fis. As Fis levels increase in cells grown 
in rich medium, the positioning of its binding site, overlapping the promoter -10
element, ensures that pnrf is sharply repressed. Here, we investigate the
expression of the nrf operon promoter from various pathogenic enteric bacteria.
We show that pnrf from enterohaemorrhagic E. coli is more active than its K-12
counterpart, exhibits substantial FNR-independent activity and is insensitive to 
nutrient quality, due to an improved -10 element. We also demonstrate that the
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium core promoter is more active than
previously thought, due to differences around the transcription start site, and
that its expression is repressed by downstream sequences. We identify the CsrA
RNA binding protein as being responsible for this, and show that CsrA
differentially regulates the E. coli K-12 and Salmonella nrf operons.

© 2017 The Authors Molecular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13647 
PMCID: PMC5434802
PMID: 28211111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Aug 19;44(14):6935-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw404. Epub 2016
May 10.

Protection against deleterious nitrogen compounds: role of σS-dependent small
RNAs encoded adjacent to sdiA.

Hao Y(1), Updegrove TB(1), Livingston NN(1), Storz G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892-5430, USA.
(2)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892-5430, USA
storz@helix.nih.gov.

Here, we report the characterization of a set of small, regulatory RNAs (sRNAs)
expressed from an Escherichia coli locus we have denoted sdsN located adjacent to
the LuxR-homolog gene sdiA Two longer sRNAs, SdsN137 and SdsN178 are transcribed 
from two σ(S)-dependent promoters but share the same terminator. Low temperature,
rich nitrogen sources and the Crl and NarP transcription factors differentially
affect the levels of the SdsN transcripts. Whole genome expression analysis after
pulse overexpression of SdsN137 and assays of lacZ fusions revealed that the
SdsN137 directly represses the synthesis of the nitroreductase NfsA, which
catalyzes the reduction of the nitrogroup (NO2) in nitroaromatic compounds and
the flavohemoglobin HmpA, which has aerobic nitric oxide (NO) dioxygenase
activity. Consistent with this regulation, SdsN137 confers resistance to
nitrofurans. In addition, SdsN137 negatively regulates synthesis of NarP.
Interestingly, SdsN178 is defective at regulating the above targets due to
unusual binding to the Hfq protein, but cleavage leads to a shorter form,
SdsN124, able to repress nfsA and hmpA.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2016.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw404 
PMCID: PMC5001591
PMID: 27166377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Immun. 2015 Sep;83(9):3470-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00351-15. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

The Periplasmic Nitrate Reductase NapABC Supports Luminal Growth of Salmonella
enterica Serovar Typhimurium during Colitis.

Lopez CA(1), Rivera-Chávez F(1), Byndloss MX(1), Bäumler AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA ajbaumler@ucdavis.edu.

The food-borne pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium benefits from
acute inflammation in part by using host-derived nitrate to respire anaerobically
and compete successfully with the commensal microbes during growth in the
intestinal lumen. The S. Typhimurium genome contains three nitrate reductases,
encoded by the narGHI, narZYV, and napABC genes. Work on homologous genes present
in Escherichia coli suggests that nitrate reductase A, encoded by the narGHI
genes, is the main enzyme promoting growth on nitrate as an electron acceptor in 
anaerobic environments. Using a mouse colitis model, we found, surprisingly, that
S. Typhimurium strains with defects in either nitrate reductase A (narG mutant)
or the regulator inducing its transcription in the presence of high
concentrations of nitrate (narL mutant) exhibited growth comparable to that of
wild-type S. Typhimurium. In contrast, a strain lacking a functional periplasmic 
nitrate reductase (napA mutant) exhibited a marked growth defect in the lumen of 
the colon. In E. coli, the napABC genes are transcribed maximally under anaerobic
growth conditions in the presence of low nitrate concentrations. Inactivation of 
narP, encoding a response regulator that activates napABC transcription in
response to low nitrate concentrations, significantly reduced the growth of S.
Typhimurium in the gut lumen. Cecal nitrate measurements suggested that the
murine cecum is a nitrate-limited environment. Collectively, our results suggest 
that S. Typhimurium uses the periplasmic nitrate reductase to support its growth 
on the low nitrate concentrations encountered in the gut, a strategy that may be 
shared with other enteric pathogens.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00351-15 
PMCID: PMC4534643
PMID: 26099579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genes Cells. 2015 Jul;20(7):601-12. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12251. Epub 2015 May 26.

Cross talk in promoter recognition between six NarL-family response regulators of
Escherichia coli two-component system.

Yoshida M(1), Ishihama A(2), Yamamoto K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo, 185-8584,
Japan.
(2)Research Institute of Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
184-0003, Japan.

Bacterial two-component system (TCS) is composed of the sensor kinase (SK) and
the response regulator (RR). After monitoring an environmental signal or
condition, SK activates RR through phosphorylation, ultimately leading to the
signal-dependent regulation of genome transcription. In Escherichia coli, a total
of more than 30 SK-RR pairs exist, each forming a cognate signal transduction
system. Cross talk of the signal transduction takes place at three stages: signal
recognition by SK (stage 1); RR phosphorylation by SK (stage 2); and target
recognition by RR (stage 3). Previously, we analyzed the stage 2 cross talk
between the whole set of E. coli SK-RR pairs and found that the cross talk takes 
place for certain combinations. As an initial attempt to identify the stage 3
cross talk at the step of target promoter recognition by RR, we analyzed in this 
study the cross-recognition of target promoters by six NarL-family RRs, EvgA,
NarL, NarP, RcsB, UhpA, and UvrY. Results of both in vivo and in vitro studies
indicated that the stage 3 cross talk takes place for limited combinations, in
particular, including a multifactor-regulated ydeP promoter.

© 2015 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12251 
PMID: 26010043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microbiology (Reading). 2015 Jul;161(7):1504-15. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000092. Epub 
2015 Apr 13.

Sensor-response regulator interactions in a cross-regulated signal transduction
network.

Huynh TN(1), Chen LL(2), Stewart V(3).

Author information: 
(1)1​ Food Science Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA,
95616-8665, USA.
(2)2​ Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA.
(3)2​ Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA 1​ Food Science Graduate Group, University of
California, Davis, CA, 95616-8665, USA.

Two-component signal transduction involves phosphoryl transfer between a
histidine kinase sensor and a response regulator effector. The nitrate-responsive
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli represent a
paradigm for a cross-regulation network, in which the paralogous sensor-response 
regulator pairs, NarX-NarL and NarQ-NarP, exhibit both cognate (e.g. NarX-NarL)
and non-cognate (e.g. NarQ-NarL) interactions to control output. Here, we
describe results from bacterial adenylate cyclase two-hybrid (BACTH) analysis to 
examine sensor dimerization as well as interaction between sensor-response
regulator cognate and non-cognate pairs. Although results from BACTH analysis
indicated that the NarX and NarQ sensors interact with each other, results from
intragenic complementation tests demonstrate that they do not form functional
heterodimers. Additionally, intragenic complementation shows that both NarX and
NarQ undergo intermolecular autophosphorylation, deviating from the previously
reported correlation between DHp (dimerization and histidyl phosphotransfer)
domain loop handedness and autophosphorylation mode. Results from BACTH analysis 
revealed robust interactions for the NarX-NarL, NarQ-NarL and NarQ-NarP pairs but
a much weaker interaction for the NarX-NarP pair. This demonstrates that
asymmetrical cross-regulation results from differential binding affinities
between different sensor-regulator pairs. Finally, results indicate that the NarL
effector (DNA-binding) domain inhibits NarX-NarL interaction. Missense
substitutions at receiver domain residue Ser-80 enhanced NarX-NarL interaction,
apparently by destabilizing the NarL receiver-effector domain interface.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000092 
PMCID: PMC4635505
PMID: 25873583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051643. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

A Crp-dependent two-component system regulates nitrate and nitrite respiration in
Shewanella oneidensis.

Dong Y(1), Wang J, Fu H, Zhou G, Shi M, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

We have previously illustrated the nitrate/nitrite respiratory pathway of
Shewanella oneidensis, which is renowned for its remarkable versatility in
respiration. Here we investigated the systems regulating the pathway with a
reliable approach which enables characterization of mutants impaired in
nitrate/nitrite respiration by guaranteeing biomass. The S. oneidensis genome
encodes an Escherichia coli NarQ/NarX homolog SO3981 and two E. coli NarP/NarL
homologs SO1860 and SO3982. Results of physiological characterization and
mutational analyses demonstrated that S. oneidensis possesses a single
two-component system (TCS) for regulation of nitrate/nitrite respiration,
consisting of the sensor kinase SO3981(NarQ) and the response regulator
SO3982(NarP). The TCS directly controls the transcription of nap and nrfA (genes 
encoding nitrate and nitrite reductases, respectively) but regulates the former
less tightly than the latter. Additionally, phosphorylation at residue 57 of
SO3982 is essential for its DNA-binding capacity. At the global control level,
Crp is found to regulate expression of narQP as well as nap and nrfA. In contrast
to NarP-NarQ, Crp is more essential for nap rather than nrfA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051643 
PMCID: PMC3519889
PMID: 23240049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2012 Jun;158(Pt 6):1402-1413. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.059048-0. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Legless pathogens: how bacterial physiology provides the key to understanding
pathogenicity.

Cole JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

This review argues that knowledge of microbial physiology and metabolism is a
prerequisite to understanding mechanisms of pathogenicity. The ability of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae to cope with stresses such as those found during infection 
requires a sialyltransferase to sialylate its lipopolysaccharide using
host-derived CMP-NANA in the human bloodstream, the ability to oxidize lactate
that is abundant in the human body, outer-membrane lipoproteins that provide the 
first line of protection against oxidative and nitrosative stress, regulation of 
NO reduction independently from the nitrite reductase that forms NO, an extra
haem group on the C-terminal extension of a cytochrome oxidase subunit, and a
respiratory capacity far in excess of metabolic requirements. These properties
are all normal components of neisserial physiology; they would all fail rigid
definitions of a pathogenicity determinant. In anaerobic cultures of enteric
bacteria, duplicate pathways for nitrate reduction to ammonia provide a selective
advantage when nitrate is either abundant or scarce. Selection of these
alternative pathways is in part regulated by two parallel two-component
regulatory systems. NarX-NarL primarily ensures that nitrate is reduced in
preference to thermodynamically less favourable terminal electron acceptors, but 
NarQ-NarP facilitates reduction of limited quantities of nitrate or other, less
favourable, terminal electron acceptors in preference to fermentative growth. How
enteric bacteria repair damage caused by nitrosative and oxidative damage
inflicted by host defences is less well understood. In both N. gonorrhoeae and
Escherichia coli, parallel pathways that duplicate particular biochemical
functions are far from redundant, but fulfil specific physiological roles.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.059048-0 
PMID: 22493300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Infect Immun. 2011 Oct;79(10):4218-26. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05395-11. Epub 2011 Aug
8.

Anaerobic respiration of Escherichia coli in the mouse intestine.

Jones SA(1), Gibson T, Maltby RC, Chowdhury FZ, Stewart V, Cohen PS, Conway T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019-0245, USA.

The intestine is inhabited by a large microbial community consisting primarily of
anaerobes and, to a lesser extent, facultative anaerobes, such as Escherichia
coli, which we have shown requires aerobic respiration to compete successfully in
the mouse intestine (S. A. Jones et al., Infect. Immun. 75:4891-4899, 2007). If
facultative anaerobes efficiently lower oxygen availability in the intestine,
then their sustained growth must also depend on anaerobic metabolism. In support 
of this idea, mutants lacking nitrate reductase or fumarate reductase have
extreme colonization defects. Here, we further explore the role of anaerobic
respiration in colonization using the streptomycin-treated mouse model. We found 
that respiratory electron flow is primarily via the naphthoquinones, which pass
electrons to cytochrome bd oxidase and the anaerobic terminal reductases. We
found that E. coli uses nitrate and fumarate in the intestine, but not nitrite,
dimethyl sulfoxide, or trimethylamine N-oxide. Competitive colonizations revealed
that cytochrome bd oxidase is more advantageous than nitrate reductase or
fumarate reductase. Strains lacking nitrate reductase outcompeted fumarate
reductase mutants once the nitrate concentration in cecal mucus reached
submillimolar levels, indicating that fumarate is the more important anaerobic
electron acceptor in the intestine because nitrate is limiting. Since nitrate is 
highest in the absence of E. coli, we conclude that E. coli is the only bacterium
in the streptomycin-treated mouse large intestine that respires nitrate. Lastly, 
we demonstrated that a mutant lacking the NarXL regulator (activator of the NarG 
system), but not a mutant lacking the NarP-NarQ regulator, has a colonization
defect, consistent with the advantage provided by NarG. The emerging picture is
one in which gene regulation is tuned to balance expression of the terminal
reductases that E. coli uses to maximize its competitiveness and achieve the
highest possible population in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05395-11 
PMCID: PMC3187261
PMID: 21825069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Med Sci. 2011;8(4):339-44. Epub 2011 May 24.

The impact of a nationwide antibiotic restriction program on antibiotic usage and
resistance against nosocomial pathogens in Turkey.

Altunsoy A(1), Aypak C, Azap A, Ergönül Ö, Balık I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Ankara University,
School of Medicine, Ibni Sina Hospital 06100, Ankara, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Antimicrobial resistance among microorganisms is a global concern. In
2003, a nationwide antibiotic restriction program (NARP) was released in Turkey. 
In this study we evaluated the effect of NARP on antibiotic consumption,
antimicrobial resistance, and cost.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The data obtained from all of the four university
hospitals, and one referral tertiary-care educational state hospital in Ankara.
Antimicrobial resistance profiles of 14,233 selected microorganisms all grown in 
blood cultures and antibiotic consumption from 2001 to 2005 were analyzed
retrospectively.
RESULTS: A negative correlation was observed between the ceftriaxone consumption 
and the prevalence of ceftriaxone resistant E.coli and Klebsiella spp.
(rho:-0.395, p:0.332 and rho:-0.627, p:0.037, respectively). The decreased usage 
of carbapenems was correlated with decreased carbapenems-resistant Pseudomonas
spp. and Acinetobacter spp (rho:0.155, p:0.712 and rho:0.180, p:0.668,
respectively for imipenem). Methicillin resistance rates of S.aureus were
decreased from 44% to 41%. After two years of NARP 5,389,155.82 USD saving
occurred.
CONCLUSION: NARP is effective in lowering the costs and antibiotic resistance.

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.8.339 
PMCID: PMC3107466
PMID: 21647326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Microbiology (Reading). 2010 Oct;156(Pt 10):2933-2943. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.040469-0. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Functional roles for the GerE-family carboxyl-terminal domains of nitrate
response regulators NarL and NarP of Escherichia coli K-12.

Lin AV(1), Stewart V(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616-8665,
USA.

NarL and NarP are paralogous response regulators that control anaerobic gene
expression in response to the favoured electron acceptors nitrate and nitrite.
Their DNA-binding carboxyl termini are in the widespread GerE-LuxR-FixJ subfamily
of tetrahelical helix-turn-helix domains. Previous biochemical and
crystallographic studies with NarL suggest that dimerization and DNA binding by
the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) is inhibited by the unphosphorylated
amino-terminal receiver domain. We report here that NarL-CTD and NarP-CTD,
liberated from their receiver domains, activated transcription in vivo from the
class II napF and yeaR operon control regions, but failed to activate from the
class I narG and fdnG operon control regions. Alanine substitutions were made to 
examine requirements for residues in the NarL DNA recognition helix.
Substitutions for Val-189 and Arg-192 blocked DNA binding as assayed both in vivo
and in vitro, whereas substitution for Arg-188 had a strong effect only in vivo. 
Similar results were obtained with the corresponding residues in NarP. Finally,
Ala substitutions identified residues within the NarL CTD as important for
transcription activation. Overall, results are congruent with those obtained for 
other GerE-family members, including GerE, TraR, LuxR and FixJ.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.040469-0 
PMCID: PMC3068693
PMID: 20634237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((norR) AND (hmp)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nitric Oxide. 2013 Nov 1;34:65-75. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.06.002. Epub 2013 Jun
11.

Nitric oxide reactivities of the two globins of the foodborne pathogen
Campylobacter jejuni: roles in protection from nitrosative stress and analysis of
potential reductants.

Tinajero-Trejo M(1), Vreugdenhil A, Sedelnikova SE, Davidge KS, Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. Electronic address: mbp09mt@sheffield.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: During infection and pathogenesis, Campylobacter, the leading cause
of gastroenteritis, encounters NO and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) derived
from the host. To combat these species, Campylobacter jejuni expresses two
haemoglobins: the single domain haemoglobin (Cgb) detoxifies NO but the role of
the truncated globin (Ctb) is unclear. Confirmation of Cgb activity and more
extensive exploration of Ctb function(s) in vivo are restricted due to
difficulties in expressing proteins in Campylobacter and our lack of
understanding of how the globin haems are re-reduced after ligand reactions.
METHODS: The cgb and ctb genes were cloned under the control of
arabinose-inducible promoters and the globins expressed in an Escherichia coli
mutant lacking the main NO detoxification mechanisms (Hmp and the Nor system
comprising the transcription regulator NorR, the flavorubredoxin and its
reductase (NorVW)); cellular responses under oxidative and nitrosative stress
conditions were assessed. Spectroscopic changes of the Cgb and Ctb haems in
soluble fractions after oxidation by NO were evaluated. Construction of E. coli
nor mutants and a ubiquinone-defective strain allowed the exploration of the
flavorubredoxin reductase and the aerobic respiratory chain as candidates for Cgb
electron donors in E. coli mutants.
RESULTS: Cgb, but not Ctb, complements the NO- and RNS-sensitive phenotype of an 
E. coli hmp mutant in aerobic conditions; however, Cgb fails to protect an hmp
norR mutant in the absence of oxygen. Reduction of Cgb and Ctb in E. coli and C. 
jejuni soluble extracts and turnover after NO oxidation is demonstrated. Finally,
we report a minor role for NorW as a Cgb reductase partner in E. coli but no role
for respiratory electron flux in globin redox cycling.
CONCLUSIONS: The NO detoxification capacity of Cgb is confirmed by heterologous
expression in E. coli. The reducibility of Cgb and Ctb in E. coli and C. jejuni
extracts and the lack of dependence of reduction upon flavorubredoxin reductase
and the respiratory chain in E. coli argue in favor of a non-specific reductase
system.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: We present the most persuasive evidence to date that Cgb,
but not Ctb, confers tolerance to NO and RNS by reaction with NO. Since certain
hypotheses for the mechanism of haem re-reduction in E. coli following the
reaction with NO are not proven, the mechanisms of reduction in C. jejuni now
require challenging experimental evaluation.

2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.06.002 
PMID: 23764490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11146-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200. Epub 2008
Feb 18.

Nitric oxide homeostasis in Salmonella typhimurium: roles of respiratory nitrate 
reductase and flavohemoglobin.

Gilberthorpe NJ(1), Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

Nitric oxide (NO) is generated in biological systems primarily via the activity
of NO synthases and nitrate and nitrite reductases. Here we show that Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium) grown anaerobically with nitrate is
capable of generating polarographically detectable NO after nitrite (NO(2)(-))
addition. NO accumulation is sensitive to the NO scavenger
2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide. Neither an fnr
mutant nor an fnr hmp double mutant produces NO, indicating the involvement in NO
evolution from NO(2)(-) of protein(s) positively regulated by FNR. Contrary to
previous findings in Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that neither the
periplasmic nitrite reductase (NrfA) nor the cytoplasmic nitrite reductase (NirB)
is involved in NO production in S. typhimurium. However, mutant cells lacking the
membrane-bound nitrate reductase, NarGHI, and membranes derived from these cells 
are unable to produce NO, demonstrating that, in wild-type S. typhimurium, this
enzyme is responsible for NO production. Membrane terminal oxidases cannot
account for the NO levels measured. The nitrate reductase inhibitor, azide,
abrogates NO evolution by Salmonella, and production of NO occurs only in the
absence from the assays of nitrate; both features reveal a marked similarity
between the NO-generating activities of this bacterium and plants. Unlike the
situation in E. coli, an S. typhimurium hmp mutant produces NO both aerobically
and anaerobically. Under aerobic conditions, when a functional flavohemoglobin is
present, no NO is detectable. We propose a homeostatic mechanism in S.
typhimurium, in which NO produced from NO(2)(-) by nitrate reductase derepresses 
Hmp expression (via FNR and NsrR) and NorV expression (via NorR) and thus limits 
NO toxicity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200 
PMID: 18285340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS Comput Biol. 2005 Oct;1(5):e55. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Dissimilatory metabolism of nitrogen oxides in bacteria: comparative
reconstruction of transcriptional networks.

Rodionov DA(1), Dubchak IL, Arkin AP, Alm EJ, Gelfand MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia. rodionov@iitp.ru

Bacterial response to nitric oxide (NO) is of major importance since NO is an
obligatory intermediate of the nitrogen cycle. Transcriptional regulation of the 
dissimilatory nitric oxides metabolism in bacteria is diverse and involves
FNR-like transcription factors HcpR, DNR, and NnrR; two-component systems NarXL
and NarQP; NO-responsive activator NorR; and nitrite-sensitive repressor NsrR.
Using comparative genomics approaches, we predict DNA-binding motifs for these
transcriptional factors and describe corresponding regulons in available
bacterial genomes. Within the FNR family of regulators, we observed a correlation
of two specificity-determining amino acids and contacting bases in corresponding 
DNA recognition motif. Highly conserved regulon HcpR for the hybrid cluster
protein and some other redox enzymes is present in diverse anaerobic bacteria,
including Clostridia, Thermotogales, and delta-proteobacteria. NnrR and DNR
control denitrification in alpha- and beta-proteobacteria, respectively.
Sigma-54-dependent NorR regulon found in some gamma- and beta-proteobacteria
contains various enzymes involved in the NO detoxification. Repressor NsrR, which
was previously known to control only nitrite reductase operon in Nitrosomonas
spp., appears to be the master regulator of the nitric oxides' metabolism, not
only in most gamma- and beta-proteobacteria (including well-studied species such 
as Escherichia coli), but also in gram-positive Bacillus and Streptomyces
species. Positional analysis and comparison of regulatory regions of NO
detoxification genes allows us to propose the candidate NsrR-binding motif. The
most conserved member of the predicted NsrR regulon is the NO-detoxifying
flavohemoglobin Hmp. In enterobacteria, the regulon also includes two
nitrite-responsive loci, nipAB (hcp-hcr) and nipC (dnrN), thus confirming the
identity of the effector, i.e. nitrite. The proposed NsrR regulons in Neisseria
and some other species are extended to include denitrification genes. As the
result, we demonstrate considerable interconnection between various
nitrogen-oxides-responsive regulatory systems for the denitrification and NO
detoxification genes and evolutionary plasticity of this transcriptional network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010055 
PMCID: PMC1274295
PMID: 16261196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 21;278(12):10081-6. Epub 2003 Jan 15.

Regulation of the nitric oxide reduction operon (norRVW) in Escherichia coli.
Role of NorR and sigma54 in the nitric oxide stress response.

Gardner AM(1), Gessner CR, Gardner PR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. Anne.Gardner@cchmc.org

Nitric oxide (NO) induces NO-detoxifying enzymes in Escherichia coli suggesting
sensitive mechanisms for coordinate control of NO defense genes in response to NO
stress. Exposure of E. coli to sub-micromolar NO levels under anaerobic
conditions rapidly induced transcription of the NO reductase (NOR) structural
genes, norV and norW, as monitored by lac gene fusions. Disruption of rpoN
(sigma(54)) impaired the NO-mediated induction of norV and norW transcription and
NOR expression, whereas disruption of the upstream regulatory gene, norR,
completely ablated NOR induction. NOR inducibility was restored to NorR null
mutants by expressing NorR in trans. Furthermore, an internal deletion of the
N-terminal domain of NorR activated NOR expression independent of NO exposure.
Neither NorR nor sigma(54) was essential for NO-mediated induction of the NO
dioxygenase (flavohemoglobin) encoded by hmp. However, elevated NOR activity
inhibited NO dioxygenase induction, and, in the presence of dioxygen, NO
dioxygenase inhibited norV induction by NO. The results demonstrate the role of
NorR as a sigma(54)-dependent regulator of norVW expression. A role for the NorR 
N-terminal domain as a transducer or sensor for NO is suggested.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212462200 
PMID: 12529359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nsrR) AND (nirB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Dec;325(2):108-14. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02385.x. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

NsrR-dependent method for detecting nitric oxide accumulation in the Escherichia 
coli cytoplasm and enzymes involved in NO production.

Vine CE(1), Purewal SK, Cole JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

A β-galactosidase assay for detecting the accumulation of NO in the Escherichia
coli cytoplasm has been developed based on the sensitive response of the
transcription repressor, NsrR, to NO. The hcp promoter is repressed by NsrR in
the absence of nitric oxide, but repression is relieved when NO accumulates in
the cytoplasm. Most, but not all, of this NO is formed by the interaction of the 
membrane-associated nitrate reductase, NarG, with nitrite. External NO at
physiologically relevant concentrations does not equilibrate across the E. coli
membrane with NsrR in the cytoplasm. The periplasmic nitrite reductase, NrfAB, is
not required to prevent equilibration of NO across the membrane. External NO
supplied at the highest concentration reported to occur in vivo does not damage
FNR sufficiently to affect transcription from the hcp or hmp promoters or from a 
synthetic promoter. We suggest that the capacity of E. coli to reduce NO is
sufficient to prevent its accumulation from external sources in the cytoplasm.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02385.x 
PMID: 22092912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11146-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200. Epub 2008
Feb 18.

Nitric oxide homeostasis in Salmonella typhimurium: roles of respiratory nitrate 
reductase and flavohemoglobin.

Gilberthorpe NJ(1), Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

Nitric oxide (NO) is generated in biological systems primarily via the activity
of NO synthases and nitrate and nitrite reductases. Here we show that Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium) grown anaerobically with nitrate is
capable of generating polarographically detectable NO after nitrite (NO(2)(-))
addition. NO accumulation is sensitive to the NO scavenger
2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide. Neither an fnr
mutant nor an fnr hmp double mutant produces NO, indicating the involvement in NO
evolution from NO(2)(-) of protein(s) positively regulated by FNR. Contrary to
previous findings in Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that neither the
periplasmic nitrite reductase (NrfA) nor the cytoplasmic nitrite reductase (NirB)
is involved in NO production in S. typhimurium. However, mutant cells lacking the
membrane-bound nitrate reductase, NarGHI, and membranes derived from these cells 
are unable to produce NO, demonstrating that, in wild-type S. typhimurium, this
enzyme is responsible for NO production. Membrane terminal oxidases cannot
account for the NO levels measured. The nitrate reductase inhibitor, azide,
abrogates NO evolution by Salmonella, and production of NO occurs only in the
absence from the assays of nitrate; both features reveal a marked similarity
between the NO-generating activities of this bacterium and plants. Unlike the
situation in E. coli, an S. typhimurium hmp mutant produces NO both aerobically
and anaerobically. Under aerobic conditions, when a functional flavohemoglobin is
present, no NO is detectable. We propose a homeostatic mechanism in S.
typhimurium, in which NO produced from NO(2)(-) by nitrate reductase derepresses 
Hmp expression (via FNR and NsrR) and NorV expression (via NorR) and thus limits 
NO toxicity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200 
PMID: 18285340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (acrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (acrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biochem. 2021 Feb 6;169(1):101-108. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100.

BaeR participates in cephalosporins susceptibility by regulating the expression
level of outer membrane proteins in Escherichia coli.

Wang S(1), You C(2), Memon FQ(1), Zhang G(1), Sun Y(3), Si H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning 530005, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangxi Nongken Yongxin Animal Husbandry Group Xijiang Co. LTD, Guigang
537000, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Institute of Science 
and Technology, Xinxiang 453003, People's Republic of China.

The two-component system BaeSR participates in antibiotics resistance of
Escherichia coli. To know whether the outer membrane proteins involve in the
antibiotics resistance mediated by BaeSR, deletion of acrB was constructed and
the recombined plasmid p-baeR was introduced into E. coli K12 and K12△acrB.
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of antibacterial agents were determined 
by 2-fold broth micro-dilution method. Gene expressions related with major outer 
membrane proteins and multidrug efflux pump-related genes were determined by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The
results revealed that the MICs of K12ΔacrB to the tested drugs except for
gentamycin and amikacin decreased 2- to 16.75-folds compared with those of K12.
When BaeR was overexpressed, the MICs of K12ΔacrB/p-baeR to ceftiofur and
cefotaxime increased 2.5- and 2-fold, respectively, compared with their
corresponding that of K12△acrB. At the same time, the expression levels of ompC, 
ompF, ompW, ompA and ompX showed significant reduction in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR as
compared with K12△acrB. Moreover, the expression levels of ompR, marA, rob and
tolC also significantly 'decreased' in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR. These findings indicated 
that BaeR overproduction can decrease cephalosporins susceptibility in acrB-free 
E. coli by decreasing the expression level of outer membrane proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100 
PMID: 32882009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (ompR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Aug 30:AAC0100421. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01004-21.
[Epub ahead of print]

OmpF Downregulation Mediated by Sigma E or OmpR Activation Confers Cefalexin
Resistance in Escherichia coli in the Absence of Acquired β-Lactamases.

Alzayn M(1)(2), Dulyayangkul P(1), Satapoomin N(1), Heesom KJ(3), Avison MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)University of Bristol Proteomics Facility, Bristol, UK.

Cefalexin is a widely used 1st generation cephalosporin, and resistance in
Escherichia coli is caused by Extended-Spectrum (e.g., CTX-M) and AmpC
β-lactamase production and therefore frequently coincides with 3rd generation
cephalosporin resistance. However, we have recently identified large numbers of
E. coli isolates from human infections, and from cattle, where cefalexin
resistance is not β-lactamase mediated. Here we show, by studying laboratory
selected mutants, clinical isolates, and isolates from cattle, that OmpF porin
disruption or downregulation is a major cause of cefalexin resistance in E. coli.
Importantly, we identify multiple regulatory mutations that cause OmpF
downregulation. In addition to mutation of ompR, already known to downregulate
OmpF and OmpC porin production, we find that rseA mutation, which strongly
activates the Sigma E regulon, greatly increasing DegP production, which degrades
OmpF, OmpC and OmpA. Furthermore, we reveal that mutations affecting
lipopolysaccharide structure, exemplified by the loss of GmhB, essential for
lipopolysaccharide heptosylation, also modestly activate DegP production,
resulting in OmpF degradation. Remarkably, given the critical importance attached
to such systems for normal E. coli physiology, we find evidence for DegP-mediated
OmpF downregulation, gmhB and rseA loss of function mutation in E. coli isolates 
derived from human infections. Finally, we show that these regulatory mutations
enhance the ability of group 1 CTX-M β-lactamase to confer reduced carbapenem
susceptibility, particularly those mutations that cause OmpC in addition to OmpF 
downregulation.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01004-21 
PMID: 34460299 


2. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jul 1;12:659614. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.659614.
eCollection 2021.

Comparison of Antibacterial Mode of Action of Silver Ions and Silver
Nanoformulations With Different Physico-Chemical Properties: Experimental and
Computational Studies.

Kędziora A(1), Wieczorek R(2), Speruda M(1), Matolínová I(3), Goszczyński TM(4), 
Litwin I(5), Matolín V(3), Bugla-Płoskońska G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of
Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland.
(3)Department of Surface and Plasma Science, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, 
Charles University, Prague, Czechia.
(4)Laboratory of Biomedical Chemistry, Department of Experimental Oncology,
Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, PAS, Wrocław, Poland.
(5)Department of Genetics and Cell Physiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland.

The aim of this study was to compare the antibacterial mode of action of silver
ions (Ag+) and selected silver nanoformulations against E. coli strains (E. coli 
J53, Escherichia coli BW25113 and its derivatives: Δ ompA, Δ ompC, Δ ompF, Δ
ompR, ompRG596AcusSG1130A, cusSG1130A). In this research we used various
experimental methods and techniques such as determination of the minimal
inhibitory concentration, flow cytometry, scanning electron microscopy, circular 
dichroism as well as computational methods of theoretical chemistry. Thanks to
the processing of bacteria and silver samples (ions and nanoformulations), we
were able to determine the bacterial sensitivity to silver samples, detect
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the bacterial cells, visualize the interaction
of silver samples with the bacterial cells, and identify their interactions with 
proteins. Differences between the mode of action of silver ions and
nanoformulations and the action of nanoformulations themselves were revealed.
Based on the results of computational methods, we proposed an explanation of the 
differences in silver-outer protein interaction between silver ions and metallic 
silver; in general, the Ag0 complexes exhibit weaker interaction than Ag+ ones.
Moreover, we identified two gutter-like areas of the inner layer of the ion
channel: one more effective, with oxygen-rich side chains; and another one less
effective, with nitrogen-rich side chains.

Copyright © 2021 Kędziora, Wieczorek, Speruda, Matolínová, Goszczyński, Litwin,
Matolín and Bugla-Płoskońska.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.659614 
PMCID: PMC8281304
PMID: 34276595 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


3. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 28;12:684473. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.684473.
eCollection 2021.

The Role of OmpR in Bile Tolerance and Pathogenesis of Adherent-Invasive
Escherichia coli.

Lucchini V(1)(2), Sivignon A(3), Pieren M(1), Gitzinger M(1), Lociuro S(1),
Barnich N(3), Kemmer C(1), Trebosc V(1).

Author information: 
(1)BioVersys AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Université Clermont Auvergne, Inserm U1071, USC-INRAE 2018, Microbes,
Intestin, Inflammation et Susceptibilité de l'Hôte (M2iSH), Clermont-Ferrand,
France.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis toward adherent-invasive Escherichia coli (AIEC) plays
an important role in Crohn's disease (CD). The OmpR transcriptional regulator is 
required for the AIEC LF82 prototype strain to adhere and invade intestinal
epithelial cells. In this study, we explored the role of OmpR in AIEC
pathogenesis using a panel of eight Escherichia coli strains isolated from CD
patients and identified as AIEC. The deletion of ompR together with the
implementation of two cell-based assays revealed that the role of OmpR in
adhesion in vitro was not conserved in AIEC clinical strains. Nevertheless, we
showed that OmpR was required for robust gut colonization of transgenic mice
expressing human CEACAM receptors, suggesting that OmpR is involved in
alternative virulence mechanisms in AIEC strains. We found that deletion of ompR 
compromised the ability of AIEC strains to cope with the stress induced by bile
salts, which may be key for AIEC pathogenesis. More specifically, we demonstrated
that OmpR was involved in a tolerance mechanism toward sodium deoxycholate (DOC),
one of bile salts main component. We showed that the misregulation of OmpF or the
loss of outer membrane integrity are not the drivers of OmpR-mediated DOC
tolerance, suggesting that OmpR regulates a specific mechanism enhancing AIEC
survival in the presence of DOC. In conclusion, the newly discovered role of OmpR
in AIEC bile tolerance suggests that OmpR inhibition would interfere with
different aspects of AIEC virulence arsenal and could be an alternative strategy 
for CD-treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Lucchini, Sivignon, Pieren, Gitzinger, Lociuro, Barnich, Kemmer 
and Trebosc.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.684473 
PMCID: PMC8273539
PMID: 34262546 

Conflict of interest statement: MP, MG, SL, CK, and VT own equity in BioVersys.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.


4. J Bacteriol. 2021 May 20;203(12):e0051520. doi: 10.1128/JB.00515-20. Epub 2021
Apr 12.

The Absence of Osmoregulated Periplasmic Glucan Confers Antimicrobial Resistance 
and Increases Virulence in Escherichia coli.

Murakami K(#)(1), Nasu H(#)(1), Fujiwara T(1), Takatsu N(1), Yoshida N(1), Furuta
K(1), Kaito C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama
University, Okayama, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Clarifying the molecular mechanisms by which bacteria acquire virulence traits is
important for understanding the bacterial virulence system. In the present study,
we utilized a bacterial evolution method in a silkworm infection model and
revealed that deletion of the opgGH operon, encoding synthases for osmoregulated 
periplasmic glucan (OPG), increased the virulence of a nonpathogenic laboratory
strain of Escherichia coli against silkworms. The opgGH knockout mutant exhibited
resistance to host antimicrobial peptides and antibiotics. Compared with the
parent strain, the opgGH knockout mutant produced greater amounts of colanic
acid, which is involved in E. coli resistance to antibiotics. RNA sequence
analysis revealed that the opgGH knockout altered the expression of various
genes, including the evgS/evgA two-component system that functions in antibiotic 
resistance. In both a colanic acid-negative background and an evgS-null
background, the opgGH knockout increased E. coli resistance to antibiotics and
increased the silkworm-killing activity of E. coli. In the null background of the
envZ/ompR two-component system, which genetically interacts with opgGH, the opgGH
knockout increased antibiotic resistance and virulence in silkworms. These
findings suggest that the absence of OPG confers antimicrobial resistance and
virulence in E. coli in a colanic acid-, evgS/evgA-, and envZ/ompR-independent
manner. IMPORTANCE The gene mutation types that increase the bacterial virulence 
of Escherichia coli remain unclear, in part due to the limited number of methods 
available for isolating bacterial mutants with increased virulence. We utilized a
bacterial evolution method in the silkworm infection model, in which silkworms
were infected with mutagenized bacteria and highly virulent bacterial mutants
were isolated from dead silkworms. We revealed that knockout of OPG synthases
increased E. coli virulence against silkworms. The OPG knockout mutants were
resistant to host antimicrobial peptides as well as antibiotics. Our findings not
only suggest a novel mechanism for virulence acquisition in E. coli but also
support the usefulness of the bacterial experimental evolution method in the
silkworm infection model.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00515-20 
PMCID: PMC8316038 [Available on 2021-11-20]
PMID: 33846116 


5. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 26;12:640923. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.640923.
eCollection 2021.

Biocide-Induced Emergence of Antibiotic Resistance in Escherichia coli.

Merchel Piovesan Pereira B(1)(2), Wang X(2)(3), Tagkopoulos I(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA,
United States.
(2)Genome Center, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA,
United States.

Biocide use is essential and ubiquitous, exposing microbes to sub-inhibitory
concentrations of antiseptics, disinfectants, and preservatives. This can lead to
the emergence of biocide resistance, and more importantly, potential
cross-resistance to antibiotics, although the degree, frequency, and mechanisms
that give rise to this phenomenon are still unclear. Here, we systematically
performed adaptive laboratory evolution of the gut bacteria Escherichia coli in
the presence of sub-inhibitory, constant concentrations of ten widespread
biocides. Our results show that 17 out of 40 evolved strains (43%) also decreased
the susceptibility to medically relevant antibiotics. Through whole-genome
sequencing, we identified mutations related to multidrug efflux proteins (mdfA
and acrR), porins (envZ and ompR), and RNA polymerase (rpoA and rpoBC), as
mechanisms behind the resulting (cross)resistance. We also report an association 
of several genes (yeaW, pyrE, yqhC, aes, pgpA, and yeeP-isrC) and specific
mutations that induce cross-resistance, verified through mutation repairs. A
greater capacity for biofilm formation with respect to the parent strain was also
a common feature in 11 out of 17 (65%) cross-resistant strains. Evolution in the 
biocides chlorophene, benzalkonium chloride, glutaraldehyde, and chlorhexidine
had the most impact in antibiotic susceptibility, while hydrogen peroxide and
povidone-iodine the least. No cross-resistance to antibiotics was observed for
isopropanol, ethanol, sodium hypochlorite, and peracetic acid. This work
reinforces the link between exposure to biocides and the potential for
cross-resistance to antibiotics, presents evidence on the underlying mechanisms
of action, and provides a prioritized list of biocides that are of greater
concern for public safety from the perspective of antibiotic
resistance.Significance Statement: Bacterial resistance and decreased
susceptibility to antimicrobials is of utmost concern. There is evidence that
improper biocide (antiseptic and disinfectant) use and discard may select for
bacteria cross-resistant to antibiotics. Understanding the cross-resistance
emergence and the risks associated with each of those chemicals is relevant for
proper applications and recommendations. Our work establishes that not all
biocides are equal when it comes to their risk of inducing antibiotic resistance;
it provides evidence on the mechanisms of cross-resistance and a risk assessment 
of the biocides concerning antibiotic resistance under residual sub-inhibitory
concentrations.

Copyright © 2021 Merchel Piovesan Pereira, Wang and Tagkopoulos.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.640923 
PMCID: PMC7952520
PMID: 33717036 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


6. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Apr 30;48(1-2). pii: kuab019. doi:
10.1093/jimb/kuab019.

Characterizing Escherichia coli's transcriptional response to different styrene
exposure modes reveals novel toxicity and tolerance insights.

Machas M(1), Kurgan G(2), Abed OA(1), Shapiro A(3), Wang X(2), Nielsen D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering, School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-6106, USA.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-6106, USA.
(3)Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The global transcriptional response of Escherichia coli to styrene and potential 
influence of exposure source was determined by performing RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) analysis on both styrene-producing and styrene-exposed cells. In both
cases, styrene exposure appears to cause both cell envelope and DNA damage, to
which cells respond by down-regulating key genes/pathways involved in DNA
replication, protein production, and cell wall biogenesis. Among the most
significantly up-regulated genes were those involved with phage shock protein
response (e.g. pspABCDE/G), general stress regulators (e.g. marA, rpoH), and
membrane-altering genes (notably, bhsA, ompR, ldtC), whereas efflux transporters 
were, surprisingly, unaffected. Subsequent studies with styrene addition
demonstrate how strains lacking ompR [involved in controlling outer membrane (OM)
composition/osmoregulation] or any of tolQ, tolA, or tolR (involved in OM
constriction) each displayed over 40% reduced growth relative to wild-type.
Conversely, despite reducing basal fitness, overexpression of plsX (involved in
phospholipid biosynthesis) led to 70% greater growth when styrene exposed. These 
collective differences point to the likely importance of OM properties in
controlling native styrene tolerance. Overall, the collective behaviours suggest 
that, regardless of source, prolonged exposure to inhibitory styrene levels
causes cells to shift from'growth mode' to 'survival mode', redistributing
cellular resources to fuel native tolerance mechanisms.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society
of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1093/jimb/kuab019 
PMID: 33640981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Jul;116(1):168-183. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14698. Epub 2021 Mar 2.

OmpR coordinates the expression of virulence factors of Enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli in the alimentary tract of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Wang ST(1), Kuo CJ(1)(2), Huang CW(2), Lee TM(3), Chen JW(1)(4), Chen CS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Oral Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), an enteropathogen that colonizes in
the intestine, causes severe diarrhea and hemorrhagic colitis in humans by the
expression of the type III secretion system (T3SS) and Shiga-like toxins (Stxs). 
However, how EHEC can sense and respond to the changes in the alimentary tract
and coordinate the expression of these virulence genes remains elusive. The
T3SS-related genes are known to be regulated by the locus of enterocyte
effacement (LEE)-encoded regulators, such as Ler, as well as non-LEE-encoded
regulators in response to different environmental cues. Herein, we report that
OmpR, which participates in the adaptation of E. coli to osmolarity and pH
alterations, is required for EHEC infection in Caenorhabditis elegans. OmpR
protein was able to directly bind to the promoters of ler and stx1 (Shiga-like
toxin 1) and regulate the expression of T3SS and Stx1, respectively, at the
transcriptional level. Moreover, we demonstrated that the expression of ler in
EHEC is in response to the intestinal environment and is regulated by OmpR in C. 
elegans. Taken together, we reveal that OmpR is an important regulator of EHEC
which coordinates the expression of virulence factors during gastrointestinal
infection in vivo.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14698 
PMID: 33567149 


8. J Struct Biol. 2021 Mar;213(1):107638. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2020.107638. Epub 2020 
Nov 3.

Structural basis for promoter DNA recognition by the response regulator OmpR.

Sadotra S(1), Lou YC(2), Tang HC(3), Chiu YC(4), Hsu CH(5), Chen C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan;
Chemical Biology and Molecular Biophysics, Taiwan International Graduate Program,
Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan; Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural
Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
sushant@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
Electronic address: yclou@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
Electronic address: hc.tang@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.
(4)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and
Academia Sinica, Taipei 106, Taiwan. Electronic address: cho761127@gmail.com.
(5)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and
Academia Sinica, Taipei 106, Taiwan; Department of Agricultural Chemistry,
National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. Electronic address:
andyhsu@ntu.edu.tw.
(6)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
Electronic address: bmchinp@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

OmpR, a response regulator of the EnvZ/OmpR two-component system (TCS), controls 
the reciprocal regulation of two porin proteins, OmpF and OmpC, in bacteria.
During signal transduction, OmpR (OmpR-FL) undergoes phosphorylation at its
conserved Asp residue in the N-terminal receiver domain (OmpRn) and recognizes
the promoter DNA from its C-terminal DNA-binding domain (OmpRc) to elicit an
adaptive response. Apart from that, OmpR regulates many genes in Escherichia coli
and is important for virulence in several pathogens. However, the molecular
mechanism of the regulation and the structural basis of OmpR-DNA binding is still
not fully clear. In this study, we presented the crystal structure of OmpRc in
complex with the F1 region of the ompF promoter DNA from E. coli. Our structural 
analysis suggested that OmpRc binds to its cognate DNA as a homodimer, only in a 
head-to-tail orientation. Also, the OmpRc apo-form showed a unique domain-swapped
crystal structure under different crystallization conditions. Biophysical
experimental data, such as NMR, fluorescent polarization and thermal stability,
showed that inactive OmpR-FL (unphosphorylated) could bind to promoter DNA with a
weaker binding affinity as compared with active OmpR-FL (phosphorylated) or
OmpRc, and also confirmed that phosphorylation may only enhance DNA binding.
Furthermore, the dimerization interfaces in the OmpRc-DNA complex structure
identified in this study provide an opportunity to understand the regulatory role
of OmpR and explore the potential for this "druggable" target.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2020.107638 
PMID: 33152421 


9. Protein Expr Purif. 2021 Jan;177:105765. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2020.105765. Epub
2020 Sep 25.

The effects of L-arginine on protein stability and DNA binding ability of SaeR, a
transcription factor in Staphylococcus aureus.

Fan R(1), Shi X(2), Guo B(2), Zhao J(2), Liu J(2), Quan C(3), Dong Y(4), Fan
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China; Key 
Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization (Ministry of Education),
College of Life Science, Dalian Minzu University, Dalian, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization (Ministry of
Education), College of Life Science, Dalian Minzu University, Dalian, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization (Ministry of
Education), College of Life Science, Dalian Minzu University, Dalian, China.
Electronic address: mikyeken@dlnu.edu.cn.
(4)School of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
Electronic address: yshdong@dlut.edu.cn.

The SaeRS two-component system in Staphylococcus aureus controls the expression
of a series of virulence factors, such as hemolysins, proteases, and coagulase.
The response regulator, SaeR, belongs to the OmpR family with an N-terminal
regulatory domain and a C-terminal DNA binding domain. To improve the production 
and stability of the recombinant protein SaeR, l-arginine (L-Arg) was added to
the purification buffers. L-Arg enhanced the solubility and stability of the
recombinant protein SaeR. The thermal denaturation temperature of SaeR in 10 mM
L-Arg buffer was significantly increased compared to the buffer without L-Arg.
Microscale Thermophoresis (MST) analysis results showed that the SaeR protein
could bind to the P1 promoter under both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated
status in buffer containing 10 mM L-Arg. These results illustrate an effective
method to purify SaeR and other proteins.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2020.105765 
PMID: 32987120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biochem. 2021 Feb 6;169(1):101-108. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100.

BaeR participates in cephalosporins susceptibility by regulating the expression
level of outer membrane proteins in Escherichia coli.

Wang S(1), You C(2), Memon FQ(1), Zhang G(1), Sun Y(3), Si H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning 530005, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangxi Nongken Yongxin Animal Husbandry Group Xijiang Co. LTD, Guigang
537000, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Institute of Science 
and Technology, Xinxiang 453003, People's Republic of China.

The two-component system BaeSR participates in antibiotics resistance of
Escherichia coli. To know whether the outer membrane proteins involve in the
antibiotics resistance mediated by BaeSR, deletion of acrB was constructed and
the recombined plasmid p-baeR was introduced into E. coli K12 and K12△acrB.
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of antibacterial agents were determined 
by 2-fold broth micro-dilution method. Gene expressions related with major outer 
membrane proteins and multidrug efflux pump-related genes were determined by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The
results revealed that the MICs of K12ΔacrB to the tested drugs except for
gentamycin and amikacin decreased 2- to 16.75-folds compared with those of K12.
When BaeR was overexpressed, the MICs of K12ΔacrB/p-baeR to ceftiofur and
cefotaxime increased 2.5- and 2-fold, respectively, compared with their
corresponding that of K12△acrB. At the same time, the expression levels of ompC, 
ompF, ompW, ompA and ompX showed significant reduction in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR as
compared with K12△acrB. Moreover, the expression levels of ompR, marA, rob and
tolC also significantly 'decreased' in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR. These findings indicated 
that BaeR overproduction can decrease cephalosporins susceptibility in acrB-free 
E. coli by decreasing the expression level of outer membrane proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100 
PMID: 32882009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (uvrC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Evol. 1989 Jun;28(6):545-52.

Two new members of the OmpR superfamily detected by homology to a sensor-binding 
core domain.

Timme TL(1), Lawrence CB, Moses RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The OmpR superfamily includes proteins that act as transcriptional regulators of 
operons that respond to environmental stimuli. A homologous domain near the
N-terminus, termed a sensor-binding core domain, is thought to play a role in
recognition of a signal transduction protein. We have identified two previously
unrecognized members of this regulator family of proteins: a 23.8-kd protein
transcribed from the uvrC transcription unit and the PgtA gene product, which is 
a phosphoglycerate transport regulatory protein. The sensor-binding core domain
is also present in four proteins that regulate bacterial sporulation and
chemotaxis. The 23.8-kd protein also has sequence similarity to elongation factor
Tu and two regulatory proteins: HtpR, the heat-shock regulatory protein, and
TraJ, a regulator of expression of genes involved in conjugation. There is a
77-amino acid region near the C-terminus of the 23.8-kd protein that has 30%
similarity with a 28.1-kd protein coded for by an open reading frame 5' to the
reading frame of the 23.8-kd protein in the uvrC transcription unit. Genetic
distance analysis of amino acid sequences of proteins with a sensor-binding core 
domain suggests that the 23.8-kd protein and the chemotaxis regulatory proteins
are distantly related to the other regulatory proteins in the OmpR superfamily.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02602935 
PMID: 2549258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (uvrY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 Oct;46(1):281-91.

Transcriptome analysis of all two-component regulatory system mutants of
Escherichia coli K-12.

Oshima T(1), Aiba H, Masuda Y, Kanaya S, Sugiura M, Wanner BL, Mori H, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Education Center for Genetic Information, Nara Institute of
Science and Technology, Ikoma 630-0101, Japan.

We have systematically examined the mRNA profiles of 36 two-component deletion
mutants, which include all two-component regulatory systems of Escherichia coli, 
under a single growth condition. DNA microarray results revealed that the mutants
belong to one of three groups based on their gene expression profiles in
Luria-Bertani broth under aerobic conditions: (i) those with no or little change;
(ii) those with significant changes; and (iii) those with drastic changes. Under 
these conditions, the anaeroresponsive ArcB/ArcA system, the osmoresponsive
EnvZ/OmpR system and the response regulator UvrY showed the most drastic changes.
Cellular functions such as flagellar synthesis and expression of the RpoS regulon
were affected by multiple two-component systems. A high correlation coefficient
of expression profile was found between several two-component mutants. Together, 
these results support the view that a network of functional interactions, such as
cross-regulation, exists between different two-component systems. The compiled
data are avail-able at our website (http://ecoli.aist-nara.ac.jp/xp_analysis/
2_components).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03170.x 
PMID: 12366850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((pdhR) AND (lipA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Res Microbiol. 2014 Jul-Aug;165(6):429-38. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2014.04.005.
Epub 2014 May 9.

PdhR, the pyruvate dehydrogenase repressor, does not regulate lipoic acid
synthesis.

Feng Y(1), Cronan JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases & State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Disease, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, PR China; Department of Medical Microbiology and
Parasitology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, 
PR China; Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
IL 61801, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL
61801, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address: j-cronan@life.uiuc.edu.

Lipoic acid is a covalently-bound enzyme cofactor required for central metabolism
all three domains of life. In the last 20 years the pathway of lipoic acid
synthesis and metabolism has been established in Escherichia coli. Expression of 
the genes of the lipoic acid biosynthesis pathway was believed to be
constitutive. However, in 2010 Kaleta and coworkers (BMC Syst. Biol. 4:116)
predicted a binding site for the pyruvate dehydrogenase operon repressor, PdhR
(referred to lipA site 1) upstream of lipA, the gene encoding lipoic acid
synthase and concluded that PdhR regulates lipA transcription. We report in vivo 
and in vitro evidence that lipA is not controlled by PdhR and that the putative
regulatory site deduced by the prior workers is nonfunctional and physiologically
irrelevant. E. coli PdhR was purified to homogeneity and used for electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. The lipA site 1 of Kaleta and coworkers failed to bind
PdhR. The binding detected by these workers is due to another site (lipA site 3) 
located far upstream of the lipA promoter. Relative to the canonical PdhR binding
site lipA site 3 is a half-palindrome and as expected had only weak PdhR binding 
ability. Manipulation of lipA site 3 to construct a palindrome gave significantly
enhanced PdhR binding affinity. The native lipA promoter and the version carrying
the artificial lipA3 palindrome were transcriptionally fused to a LacZ reporter
gene to directly assay lipA expression. Deletion of pdhR gave no significant
change in lipA promoter-driven β-galactosidase activity with either the native or
constructed palindrome upstream sequences, indicating that PdhR plays no
physiological role in regulation of lipA expression.

Copyright © 2014 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2014.04.005 
PMCID: PMC4134263
PMID: 24816490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Aug 18;4:116. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116.

Integrative inference of gene-regulatory networks in Escherichia coli using
information theoretic concepts and sequence analysis.

Kaleta C(1), Göhler A, Schuster S, Jahreis K, Guthke R, Nikolajewa S.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology/Bioinformatics Group, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Beutenbergstr, 11a,
D-07745 Jena, Germany. christoph.kaleta@uni-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Although Escherichia coli is one of the best studied model organisms,
a comprehensive understanding of its gene regulation is not yet achieved. There
exist many approaches to reconstruct regulatory interaction networks from gene
expression experiments. Mutual information based approaches are most useful for
large-scale network inference.
RESULTS: We used a three-step approach in which we combined gene regulatory
network inference based on directed information (DTI) and sequence analysis. DTI 
values were calculated on a set of gene expression profiles from 19 time course
experiments extracted from the Many Microbes Microarray Database. Focusing on
influences between pairs of genes in which one partner encodes a transcription
factor (TF) we derived a network which contains 878 TF - gene interactions of
which 166 are known according to RegulonDB. Afterward, we selected a subset of
109 interactions that could be confirmed by the presence of a phylogenetically
conserved binding site of the respective regulator. By this second step, the
fraction of known interactions increased from 19% to 60%. In the last step, we
checked the 44 of the 109 interactions not yet included in RegulonDB for
functional relationships between the regulator and the target and, thus, obtained
ten TF - target gene interactions. Five of them concern the regulator LexA and
have already been reported in the literature. The remaining five influences
describe regulations by Fis (with two novel targets), PhdR, PhoP, and KdgR. For
the validation of our approach, one of them, the regulation of lipoate synthase
(LipA) by the pyruvate-sensing pyruvate dehydrogenate repressor (PdhR), was
experimentally checked and confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: We predicted a set of five novel TF - target gene interactions in E.
coli. One of them, the regulation of lipA by the transcriptional regulator PdhR
was validated experimentally. Furthermore, we developed DTInfer, a new R-package 
for the inference of gene-regulatory networks from microarrays using directed
information.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116 
PMCID: PMC2936295
PMID: 20718955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ahpC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Microbiol. 2017 Mar 8;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12866-017-0966-x.

Disruption of rcsB by a duplicated sequence in a curli-producing Escherichia coli
O157:H7 results in differential gene expression in relation to biofilm formation,
stress responses and metabolism.

Sharma VK(1), Bayles DO(2), Alt DP(2), Looft T(3), Brunelle BW(3), Stasko JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Food Safety and Enteric Pathogens Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, ARS-USDA, P. O. Box 70, 1920 Dayton Avenue, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
vijay.sharma@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Infectious Bacterial Diseases Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center,
ARS-USDA, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
(3)Food Safety and Enteric Pathogens Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, ARS-USDA, P. O. Box 70, 1920 Dayton Avenue, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
(4)Microscopy Services Unit, National Animal Disease Center, ARS-USDA, Ames, IA, 
50010, USA.

BACKGROUND: Escherichia coli O157:H7 (O157) strain 86-24, linked to a 1986
disease outbreak, displays curli- and biofilm-negative phenotypes that are
correlated with the lack of Congo red (CR) binding and formation of white
colonies (CR-) on a CR-containing medium. However, on a CR medium this strain
produces red isolates (CR+) capable of producing curli fimbriae and biofilms.
RESULTS: To identify genes controlling differential expression of curli fimbriae 
and biofilm formation, the RNA-Seq profile of a CR+ isolate was compared to the
CR- parental isolate. Of the 242 genes expressed differentially in the CR+
isolate, 201 genes encoded proteins of known functions while the remaining 41
encoded hypothetical proteins. Among the genes with known functions, 149 were
down- and 52 were up-regulated. Some of the upregulated genes were linked to
biofilm formation through biosynthesis of curli fimbriae and flagella. The genes 
encoding transcriptional regulators, such as CsgD, QseB, YkgK, YdeH, Bdm, CspD,
BssR and FlhDC, which modulate biofilm formation, were significantly altered in
their expression. Several genes of the envelope stress (cpxP), heat shock (rpoH, 
htpX, degP), oxidative stress (ahpC, katE), nutrient limitation stress (phoB-phoR
and pst) response pathways, and amino acid metabolism were downregulated in the
CR+ isolate. Many genes mediating acid resistance and colanic acid biosynthesis, 
which influence biofilm formation directly or indirectly, were also
down-regulated. Comparative genomics of CR+ and CR- isolates revealed the
presence of a short duplicated sequence in the rcsB gene of the CR+ isolate. The 
alignment of the amino acid sequences of RcsB of the two isolates showed
truncation of RcsB in the CR+ isolate at the insertion site of the duplicated
sequence. Complementation of CR+ isolate with rcsB of the CR- parent restored
parental phenotypes to the CR+ isolate.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that RcsB is a global regulator
affecting bacterial survival in growth-restrictive environments through
upregulation of genes promoting biofilm formation while downregulating certain
metabolic functions. Understanding whether rcsB inactivation enhances persistence
and survival of O157 in carrier animals and the environment would be important in
developing strategies for controlling this bacterial pathogen in these niches.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-017-0966-x 
PMCID: PMC5343319
PMID: 28274217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (creC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2008 May;190(9):3404-7. doi: 10.1128/JB.00040-08. Epub 2008 Mar 7.

The legacy of HfrH: mutations in the two-component system CreBC are responsible
for the unusual phenotype of an Escherichia coli arcA mutant.

Nikel PI(1), de Almeida A, Pettinari MJ, Méndez BS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Strains derived from HfrH carrying the arcA2 null mutation exhibit a higher
respiratory rate, enhanced glucose consumption, and a more-reduced intracellular 
redox state than arcA deletion mutants of a different lineage. The phenotype of
the arcA2 mutants was due to the presence of a creC constitutive mutation
introduced by P1 transduction.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00040-08 
PMCID: PMC2347385
PMID: 18326580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2007 Dec;277(2):254-9.

Transcript and protein level analyses of the interactions among PhoB, PhoR, PhoU 
and CreC in response to phosphate starvation in Escherichia coli.

Baek JH, Kang YJ, Lee SY.

The responses to phosphate starvation by PhoR-PhoB two-component regulatory
system are also affected by other regulatory systems in Escherichia coli. The
interactions among PhoB, PhoR, PhoU and CreC were investigated at transcript and 
protein levels using real-time PCR and fluorescence resonance energy transfer
analyses. CreC showed an interaction with PhoB, before an interaction between
PhoB and PhoR, suggesting that this acts as a constant sensor for the early
response to phosphate starvation. PhoU was found to interact with neither PhoB
nor PhoR, while this acted as a phosphate starvation-inducible protein. These
results showed the detailed time- and phosphate concentration-dependent
interactions among PhoB, PhoR, PhoU and CreC in response to phosphate starvation 
in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.00965.x 
PMID: 18031348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Oct;22(1):135-47.

Involvement of the sensor kinase EnvZ in the in vivo activation of the
response-regulator PhoB by acetyl phosphate.

Kim SK(1), Wilmes-Riesenberg MR, Wanner BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907, USA.

Three signalling pathways lead to activation of the phosphate (Pho) regulon by
phosphorylation of the response-regulator PhoB in Escherichia coli. One pathway
responds to the extracellular inorganic phosphate (PI) level and leads to
activation by the Pi sensor kinase, PhoR. The other two pathways are Pi
independent and are apparent in the absence of PhoR. One Pi-independent pathway
responds to the level of an unknown catabolite and leads to activation by the
catabolite regulatory sensor kinase, CreC (originally called PhoM); the other
Pi-independent pathway responds to acetyl phosphate and leads to activation by a 
process requiring acetyl phosphate. Here we show that activation of PhoB by
acetyl phosphate can require the sensor kinase EnvZ. Accordingly, we propose that
the in vivo activation of PhoB by acetyl phosphate (and perhaps other
two-component response-regulators as well) probably always requires a certain
kinase that can vary depending upon the growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1996.tb02663.x 
PMID: 8899716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 29;270(39):23143-9.

Cross-talk between the histidine protein kinase VanS and the response regulator
PhoB. Characterization and identification of a VanS domain that inhibits
activation of PhoB.

Fisher SL(1), Jiang W, Wanner BL, Walsh CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

VanS is a two-component transmembrane sensory kinase that, together with its
response regulator VanR, activates the expression of genes responsible for
vancomycin resistance in Enterococcus faecium BM4147. In this report, we
demonstrate that the cytoplasmic domain of VanS (including residues Met95 to
Ser384) is capable of high level activation (> 500 fold) of the Escherichia coli 
response regulator PhoB in vivo in the absence of its signaling kinases PhoR,
CreC (PhoM), or acetyl phosphate synthesis. In vitro experiments carried out on
the purified proteins confirmed that the activation is due to efficient
cross-talk between VanS and PhoB, since phospho-VanS catalyzed transfer of its
phosphoryl group to PhoB with approximately 90% transfer in 5 min at a 1:4
VanS/PhoB stoichiometry. However, the rate of transfer was at least 100-fold
slower than that observed between phospho-VanS and VanR. The in vivo activation
of PhoB was used as a reporter system to identify peptide fragments of VanS
capable of interfering with activation by VanS(Met95-Ser384), in order to
identify an interaction domain. A library of plasmids encoding fragments of
VanS(Met95-Ser384) was constructed using transposon mutagenesis, and a
subpopulation of these plasmids encoded peptides that interfered with activation 
of PhoB by VanS(Met95-Ser384). A minimal size fragment (Met95-Ile174) was shown
to be both necessary and sufficient for potent inhibition (85%) of this
activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.39.23143 
PMID: 7559459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 1993 Apr;8(1):81-91.

Sensor and regulator proteins from the cyanobacterium Synechococcus species
PCC7942 that belong to the bacterial signal-transduction protein families:
implication in the adaptive response to phosphate limitation.

Aiba H(1), Nagaya M, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University, Japan.

A 1.2kb DNA fragment was cloned from Synechococcus sp. PCC7942, which is able
phenotypically to complement a phoR creC Escherichia coli mutant for the
expression of alkaline phosphatase. A 2.5 kb DNA fragment encompassing the
putative gene was then cloned and its complete nucleotide sequence determined.
Nucleotide sequencing revealed that the intact gene encodes a protein of 46,389
Da, and that the deduced amino acid sequence shows a high degree of homology to
those of the bacterial sensory kinase family. In the determined nucleotide
sequence, another gene was adjacently located, which encodes a protein of 29,012 
Da. This protein shows a high degree of homology to those of the response
regulator family. Thus, we succeeded in the cloning of a pair of genes encoding
the sensory kinase and response regulator, respectively, in a cyanobacterium.
Mutant strains that lack these genes were constructed, and demonstrated to be
defective in their ability to produce alkaline phosphatase and some inducible
proteins in response to phosphate-limitation in the medium. These results are
probably involved, either directly or indirectly, in the signal-transduction
mechanism underlying regulation of the phosphate regulon in Synechococcus sp.
PCC7942. Hence, the genes encoding the sensory kinase and response regulator were
designated as sphS and sphR, respectively (Synechococcus phosphate regulon). The 
SphS protein was demonstrated in vitro to undergo phosphorylation in the presence
of ATP.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1993.tb01205.x 
PMID: 8497200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cell Biochem. 1993 Jan;51(1):47-54.

Gene regulation by phosphate in enteric bacteria.

Wanner BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907.

The Escherichia coli phosphate (PHO) regulon includes 31 (or more) genes arranged
in eight separate operons. All are coregulated by environmental (extra-cellular) 
phosphate and are probably involved in phosphorus assimilation. Pi control of
these genes requires the sensor PhoR, the response regulator PhoB, the binding
protein-dependent Pi-specific transporter Pst, and the accessory protein PhoU.
During Pi limitation, PhoR turns on genes of the PHO regulon by phosphorylating
PhoB that in turn activates transcription by binding to promoters that share an
18-base consensus PHO Box. When Pi is in excess, PhoR, Pst, and PhoU together
turn off the PHO regulon, presumably by dephosphorylating PhoB. In addition, two 
Pi-independent controls that may be forms of cross regulation turn on the PHO
regulon in the absence of PhoR. The sensor CreC, formerly called PhoM,
phosphorylates PhoB in response to some (unknown) catabolite, while acetyl
phosphate may directly phosphorylate PhoB. Cross regulation of the PHO regulon by
CreC and acetyl phosphate may be examples of underlying control mechanisms
important for the general (global) control of cell growth and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.240510110 
PMID: 8432742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1992 Apr;174(7):2124-30.

Involvement of phosphotransacetylase, acetate kinase, and acetyl phosphate
synthesis in control of the phosphate regulon in Escherichia coli.

Wanner BL(1), Wilmes-Riesenberg MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907.

Two controls of the phosphate (PHO) regulon require sensor proteins that are
protein kinases that phosphorylate the regulator, PhoB, which in turn activates
transcription only when phosphorylated. Pi control requires the Pi sensor PhoR;
the other control is Pi independent and requires the sensor CreC (formerly called
PhoM). Here we describe an additional control of the PHO regulon which is Pi
independent and requires neither PhoR nor CreC. This control is regulated by a
two-step pathway in carbon metabolism in which acetyl coenzyme A, Pi, and ADP are
converted into acetate, coenzyme A, and ATP via the enzymes phosphotransacetylase
(Pta) and acetate kinase (AckA). It responds to the synthesis of acetyl
phosphate, an intermediate in the Pta-AckA pathway. Since the synthesis of acetyl
phosphate via this pathway leads to the incorporation of Pi into ATP, the primary
phosphoryl donor in metabolism, we propose that a regulatory coupling(s) may
exist between the PHO regulon, which encodes genes for Pi uptake, and genes for
enzymes in central metabolism for incorporation of Pi into ATP. Regulatory
interactions of this sort may be important in global control. Further, it
provides a functional basis for the concept of cross-regulation in the PHO
regulon. This is also the first evidence that acetyl phosphate may have a role as
an effector of gene regulation.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.7.2124-2130.1992 
PMCID: PMC205829
PMID: 1551836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 1990 Nov;172(11):6300-7.

Cross talk to the phosphate regulon of Escherichia coli by PhoM protein: PhoM is 
a histidine protein kinase and catalyzes phosphorylation of PhoB and PhoM-open
reading frame 2.

Amemura M(1), Makino K, Shinagawa H, Nakata A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Chemotherapy, Osaka University, Japan.

Transcription of the genes in the phosphate regulon in Escherichia coli is
activated by PhoB protein, which is phosphorylated by PhoR protein under
phosphate-limiting conditions. In the absence of the phoR function, the genes in 
the phosphate regulon are expressed constitutively and the expression is
dependent on the function of phoM and phoB. We constructed a plasmid with a
lacZ'-'phoM fusion gene, which encoded a hybrid protein (PhoM1206) in which the
hydrophobic amino-terminal half of the native PhoM was replaced by
beta-galactosidase. The phoM1206 gene could complement the phoM mutation in vivo.
We purified PhoM1206 from the overproducing strain carrying the plasmid; it was
autophosphorylated at a histidine residue in the presence of ATP, and the
phospho-PhoM1206 phosphorylated PhoB. PhoM1206 could also transphosphorylate the 
product of phoM-orf2, which is structurally homologous to phoB and located
immediately upstream of phoM. Although PhoR1084 that lacked the hydrophobic
amino-terminal region of the native PhoR protein transphosphorylated PhoB, it
could not phosphorylate PhoM-open reading frame 2. Therefore, cross talk by
protein phosphorylation appears to occur from PhoM to PhoB but not from PhoR to
PhoM-open reading frame 2.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.11.6300-6307.1990 
PMCID: PMC526813
PMID: 2228961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (dnaK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2008 Aug;5(4):437-47. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2008.0100.

Examination of stress and virulence gene expression in Escherichia coli O157:H7
using targeted microarray analysis.

Allen KJ(1), Lepp D, McKellar RC, Griffiths MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Canadian Research Institute for Food Safety,
University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Escherichia coli O157:H7 poses a threat to humans through food- and water-borne
transmission. To investigate how environmental stresses affect the Escherichia
coli O157:H7 transcriptome, we designed a targeted microarray consisting of
stress response and virulence genes (n = 125) to analyze the impact of acidified 
(pH 3.5), cold (7.5 degrees C), and fresh tryptic soy broth (TSB) (37 degrees C) 
on E. coli O157:H7 stress response and virulence gene expression. Nutrient
replenishment with fresh TSB resulted in 72 differentially expressed genes (> or 
= 1.5-fold change; p < 0.05), with 65 induced. All queried global and specific
stress regulators were affected, as were 12 virulence genes. Cold-shocked cells
displayed 17 differentially expressed genes, with 10 being induced. Induction of 
rpoS, members of the sigma(H) regulon (clpB, dnaK, ftsH), and acid resistance
(AR) genes (gadA, gadX) was observed. Porin transcript (ompC, ompF) and gapA and 
tufA ancillary genes were repressed. Acid shock resulted in 24 differentially
expressed genes, with 21 induced. No induction of any stationary phase AR system 
was observed, though acid-coping mechanisms were recruited, including mar and
phoB induction, and repression of ompC and ompF. Stress regulators were induced, 
including relA, soxS, rpoE, and rpoH. The microarray data were validated by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Exposure to sublethal stress
events led to the induction of diverse stress response networks. In the food
chain, sublethal events may render cells increasingly resistant to future
stresses, potentially leading to increased survival.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2008.0100 
PMID: 18713062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ftsE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 1994 Sep;140 ( Pt 9):2289-98.

Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of a 15 kb region of the Bacillus subtilis
genome containing the iol operon.

Yoshida K(1), Sano H, Miwa Y, Ogasawara N, Fujita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering, Fukuyama University,
Japan.

Within the framework of an international project on the sequencing of the whole
Bacillus subtilis genome, a 15 kb chromosome segment, which contains the iol
operon involved in inositol utilization, has been cloned and sequenced. This
region (14,974 bp) contains 12 complete open reading frames (ORFs; genes) and two
partial ones; the seventh gene (E83G) is the idh gene encoding inositol
dehydrogenase. All the genes identified are transcribed in the same direction as 
that of the movement of the replication fork. A homology search for their
products deduced from the 12 complete ORFs revealed that eight of them exhibit
significant homology to known proteins such as fructokinase, acetolactate
synthase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (B. subtilis), and PhoB and FtsE
proteins (Escherichia coli). It also implied that two genes (B65D and B65E) might
encode a set of two-component regulatory proteins and that the B65F gene might
encode a protein belonging to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family. Based on the
features of the nucleotide sequence determined and the results of the homology
search, the primary structure of the iol operon is predicted.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-140-9-2289 
PMID: 7952181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ompR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 27;10(1):3661. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3.

Epistatic Effect of Regulators to the Adaptive Growth of Escherichia coli.

Miyake Y(1), Yamamoto K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan.
(2)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.
(3)Hosei University, Research Institute of Micro-Nano Technology, Koganei, Tokyo,
184-8584, Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.

Bacteria survive in the environment with three steps: a sensing environmental
conditions, a responding to sensed signals, and an adaptation for proper survival
in the environment. An adapting bacterial cell occurs cell division to increase
the number of sister cells, termed adaptive growth. Two-component systems (TCSs),
representing the main bacterial signal transduction systems, consist of a pair of
one sensor kinase (SK) and one response regulator (RR), and RR genes are abundant
in most bacterial genomes as part of the core genome. The OmpR gene family, a
group of RR genes, is conserved in 95% of known bacterial genomes. The
Escherichia coli genome has an estimated 34 RR genes in total, including 14 genes
of OmpR family genes. To reveal the contribution of TCSs for fast growth as an
adaptive growth strategy of E. coli, we isolated a set of gene knockout strains
by using newly developed genome editing technology, the HoSeI (Homologous
Sequence Integration) method, based on CRISPR-Cas9. The statistics of single cell
observation show a knockout of an arbitrary pair of phoP, phoB, and ompR genes,
stably expressed by positive feedback regulation, dramatically inhibit the
optimum adaptive growth of E. coli. These insights suggest that the adaptive
growth of bacteria is fulfilled by the optimum high intracellular level of
regulators acquired during growth under environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3 
PMCID: PMC7046781
PMID: 32108145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Can J Microbiol. 2015 Nov;61(11):799-810. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2015-0345. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Prokaryotic 2-component systems and the OmpR/PhoB superfamily.

Nguyen MP(1), Yoon JM(1), Cho MH(2), Lee SW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Crop Biotech Institute, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446-701, Korea.
(2)b Department of Genetic Engineering and Graduate School of Biotechnology,
Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446-701, Korea.

In bacteria, 2-component regulatory systems (TCSs) are the critical
information-processing pathways that link stimuli to specific adaptive responses.
Signals perceived by membrane sensors, which are generally histidine kinases, are
transmitted by response regulators (RRs) to allow cells to cope rapidly and
effectively with environmental challenges. Over the past few decades, genes
encoding components of TCSs and their responsive proteins have been identified,
crystal structures have been described, and signaling mechanisms have been
elucidated. Here, we review recent findings and interesting breakthroughs in
bacterial TCS research. Furthermore, we discuss structural features, mechanisms
of activation and regulation, and cross-regulation of RRs, with a focus on the
largest RR family, OmpR/PhoB, to provide a comprehensive overview of these
critically important signaling molecules.

DOI: 10.1139/cjm-2015-0345 
PMID: 26382712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. mBio. 2014 Aug 26;5(5):e01684-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01684-14.

The influence of repressor DNA binding site architecture on transcriptional
control.

Park DM(1), Kiley PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA pjkiley@wisc.edu.

How the architecture of DNA binding sites dictates the extent of repression of
promoters is not well understood. Here, we addressed the importance of the number
and information content of the three direct repeats (DRs) in the binding and
repression of the icdA promoter by the phosphorylated form of the global
Escherichia coli repressor ArcA (ArcA-P). We show that decreasing the information
content of the two sites with the highest information (DR1 and DR2) eliminated
ArcA binding to all three DRs and ArcA repression of icdA. Unexpectedly, we also 
found that DR3 occupancy functions principally in repression, since mutation of
this low-information-content site both eliminated DNA binding to DR3 and
significantly weakened icdA repression, despite the fact that binding to DR1 and 
DR2 was intact. In addition, increasing the information content of any one of the
three DRs or addition of a fourth DR increased ArcA-dependent repression but
perturbed signal-dependent regulation of repression. Thus, our data show that the
information content and number of DR elements are critical architectural features
for maintaining a balance between high-affinity binding and signal-dependent
regulation of icdA promoter function in response to changes in ArcA-P levels.
Optimization of such architectural features may be a common strategy to either
dampen or enhance the sensitivity of DNA binding among the members of the large
OmpR/PhoB family of regulators as well as other transcription factors.IMPORTANCE:
In Escherichia coli, the response regulator ArcA maintains homeostasis of redox
carriers under O2-limiting conditions through a comprehensive repression of
carbon oxidation pathways that require aerobic respiration to recycle redox
carriers. Although a binding site architecture comprised of a variable number of 
sequence recognition elements has been identified within the promoter regions of 
ArcA-repressed operons, it is unclear how this variable architecture dictates
transcriptional regulation. By dissecting the role of multiple sequence elements 
within the icdA promoter, we provide insight into the design principles that
allow ArcA to repress transcription within diverse promoter contexts. Our data
suggest that the arrangement of recognition elements is tailored to achieve
sufficient repression of a given promoter while maintaining appropriate
signal-dependent regulation of repression, providing insight into how diverse
binding site architectures link changes in O2 with the fine-tuning of carbon
oxidation pathway levels.

Copyright © 2014 Park and Kiley.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01684-14 
PMCID: PMC4173790
PMID: 25161193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e91760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091760. eCollection
2014.

Atypical response regulator ChxR from Chlamydia trachomatis is structurally
poised for DNA binding.

Barta ML(1), Hickey JM(2), Anbanandam A(3), Dyer K(4), Hammel M(4), Hefty PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas, United States of America.
(3)Del Shankel Structural Biology Center, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
United States of America.
(4)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

ChxR is an atypical two-component signal transduction response regulator (RR) of 
the OmpR/PhoB subfamily encoded by the obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen 
Chlamydia trachomatis. Despite structural homology within both receiver and
effector domains to prototypical subfamily members, ChxR does not require
phosphorylation for dimer formation, DNA binding or transcriptional activation.
Thus, we hypothesized that ChxR is in a conformation optimal for DNA binding with
limited interdomain interactions. To address this hypothesis, the NMR solution
structure of the ChxR effector domain was determined and used in combination with
the previously reported ChxR receiver domain structure to generate a full-length 
dimer model based upon SAXS analysis. Small-angle scattering of ChxR supported a 
dimer with minimal interdomain interactions and effector domains in a
conformation that appears to require only subtle reorientation for optimal
major/minor groove DNA interactions. SAXS modeling also supported that the
effector domains were in a head-to-tail conformation, consistent with ChxR
recognizing tandem DNA repeats. The effector domain structure was leveraged to
identify key residues that were critical for maintaining protein - nucleic acid
interactions. In combination with prior analysis of the essential location of
specific nucleotides for ChxR recognition of DNA, a model of the full-length ChxR
dimer bound to its cognate cis-acting element was generated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091760 
PMCID: PMC3960148
PMID: 24646934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3282. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4282.

An asymmetric heterodomain interface stabilizes a response regulator-DNA complex.

Narayanan A(1), Kumar S(2), Evrard AN(3), Paul LN(4), Yernool DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2].
(2)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2] [3].
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State Street,
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.
(4)Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue University, 1203 West State Street, West
Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.
(5)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2] Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue 
University, 1203 West State Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Two-component signal transduction systems consist of pairs of histidine kinases
and response regulators, which mediate adaptive responses to environmental cues. 
Most activated response regulators regulate transcription by binding tightly to
promoter DNA via a phosphorylation-triggered inactive-to-active transition. The
molecular basis for formation of stable response regulator-DNA complexes that
precede the assembly of RNA polymerases is unclear. Here, we present structures
of DNA complexed with the response regulator KdpE, a member of the OmpR/PhoB
family. The distinctively asymmetric complex in an active-like conformation
reveals a unique intramolecular interface between the receiver domain (RD) and
the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of only one of the two response regulators in the
complex. Structure-function studies show that this RD-DBD interface is necessary 
to form stable complexes that support gene expression. The conservation of
sequence and structure suggests that these findings extend to a large group of
response regulators that act as transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4282 
PMCID: PMC4399498
PMID: 24526190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Biol. 2013 May 27;425(10):1612-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.02.003. Epub
2013 Feb 8.

Comprehensive analysis of OmpR phosphorylation, dimerization, and DNA binding
supports a canonical model for activation.

Barbieri CM(1), Wu T, Stock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, 679 Hoes Lane West, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The OmpR/PhoB family of response regulators (RRs) is the largest class of
two-component system signal transduction proteins. Extensive biochemical and
structural characterization of these transcription factors has provided insights 
into their activation and DNA-binding mechanisms. For the most part, OmpR/PhoB
family proteins are thought to become activated through phosphorylation from
their cognate histidine kinase partners, which in turn facilitates an allosteric 
change in the RR, enabling homodimerization and subsequently enhanced DNA
binding. Incongruently, it has been suggested that OmpR, the eponymous member of 
this RR family, becomes activated via different mechanisms, whereby DNA binding
plays a central role in facilitating dimerization and phosphorylation.
Characterization of the rate and extent of the phosphorylation of OmpR and OmpR
DNA-binding mutants following activation of the EnvZ/OmpR two-component system
shows that DNA binding is not essential for phosphorylation of OmpR in vivo. In
addition, detailed analyses of the energetics of DNA binding and dimerization of 
OmpR in both its unphosphorylated and phosphorylated state indicate that
phosphorylation enhances OmpR dimerization and that this dimerization enhancement
is the energetic driving force for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of
OmpR-DNA binding. These findings suggest that OmpR phosphorylation-mediated
activation follows the same paradigm as the other members of the OmpR/PhoB family
of RRs in contrast to previously proposed models of OmpR activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.02.003 
PMCID: PMC3646996
PMID: 23399542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030102. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Structure-function studies of DNA binding domain of response regulator KdpE
reveals equal affinity interactions at DNA half-sites.

Narayanan A(1), Paul LN, Tomar S, Patil DN, Kumar P, Yernool DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
United States of America.

Expression of KdpFABC, a K(+) pump that restores osmotic balance, is controlled
by binding of the response regulator KdpE to a specific DNA sequence
(kdpFABC(BS)) via the winged helix-turn-helix type DNA binding domain
(KdpE(DBD)). Exploration of E. coli KdpE(DBD) and kdpFABC(BS) interaction
resulted in the identification of two conserved, AT-rich 6 bp direct repeats that
form half-sites. Despite binding to these half-sites, KdpE(DBD) was incapable of 
promoting gene expression in vivo. Structure-function studies guided by our 2.5 Å
X-ray structure of KdpE(DBD) revealed the importance of residues R193 and R200 in
the α-8 DNA recognition helix and T215 in the wing region for DNA binding.
Mutation of these residues renders KdpE incapable of inducing expression of the
kdpFABC operon. Detailed biophysical analysis of interactions using analytical
ultracentrifugation revealed a 2∶1 stoichiometry of protein to DNA with
dissociation constants of 200±100 and 350±100 nM at half-sites. Inactivation of
one half-site does not influence binding at the other, indicating that KdpE(DBD) 
binds independently to the half-sites with approximately equal affinity and no
discernable cooperativity. To our knowledge, these data are the first to describe
in quantitative terms the binding at half-sites under equilibrium conditions for 
a member of the ubiquitous OmpR/PhoB family of proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030102 
PMCID: PMC3264566
PMID: 22291906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010;18(1):24-36. doi: 10.1159/000274309. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

The complexities of porin genetic regulation.

De la Cruz MA(1), Calva E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Cuernavaca, México.

Our understanding of porin regulation has revealed not only increasing complexity
in the regulatory mechanisms, but also that the porin repertoire is more
extensive than previously conceived. Initially, the OmpR response regulator was
described as the master regulator of porin genes, but many more regulators are
involved such as CpxR, PhoB, Lrp, Rob, MarA, SoxS, CadC, CRP, Fnr, ToxR, H-NS,
StpA, IHF, HU and LeuO. In addition to MicF, the first small RNA (sRNA) that was 
proposed to regulate porin expression, porins are post-transcriptionally
regulated by a variety of other sRNAs, namely, MicC, MicA, IpeX, RseX, InvR, CyaR
and RybB. Future challenges include the full integration of all the regulatory
circuitries. Whether quiescent porins are merely replacements of the major porins
or are part of novel metabolic programs has yet to be elucidated. The
comprehensive exploration of the environmental determinants that affect porin
gene expression should yield valuable new information about the functions of
these important proteins.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000274309 
PMID: 20068355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(6):1358-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06355.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 9.

System-level mapping of Escherichia coli response regulator dimerization with
FRET hybrids.

Gao R(1), Tao Y, Stock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Howard HughesMedical
Institute, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(6):1336-40.

SUMMARY: Two-component signal transduction, featuring highly conserved histidine 
kinases (HKs) and response regulators (RRs), is one of the most prevalent
signalling schemes in prokaryotes. RRs function as phosphorylation-activated
switches to mediate diverse output responses, mostly via transcription
regulation. As bacterial genomes typically encode multiple two-component proteins
for distinct signalling pathways, the sequence and structural similarities of RR 
receiver domains create significant challenges to maintain interaction
specificity. It is especially demanding for members of the OmpR/PhoB subfamily,
the largest RR subfamily, which share a conserved dimerization interface for
phosphorylation-mediated transcription regulation. We developed a strategy to
investigate RR interaction by analysing Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) 
between cyan fluorescent protein (CFP)- and yellow fluorescent protein
(YFP)-fused RRs in vitro. Using the Escherichia coli RR PhoB as a model system,
we were able to observe phosphorylation-dependent FRET between fluorescent
protein (FP)-PhoB proteins and validated the FRET method by determining
dimerization affinity and dimerization-coupled phosphorylation kinetics that
recapitulated values determined by alternative methods. Further application of
the FRET method to all E. coli OmpR/PhoB subfamily RRs revealed that
phosphorylation-activated RR interaction is indeed a common theme for OmpR/PhoB
subfamily RRs and these RRs display significant interaction specificity. Weak
hetero-pair interactions were also identified between several different RRs,
suggesting potential cross-regulation between distinct pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06355.x 
PMCID: PMC2586830
PMID: 18631241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8664-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705550200. Epub 2008 
Jan 14.

Amino acids important for DNA recognition by the response regulator OmpR.

Rhee JE(1), Sheng W, Morgan LK, Nolet R, Liao X, Kenney LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL
60612, USA.

Response regulators undergo regulated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation at
conserved aspartic acid residues in bacterial signal transduction systems. OmpR
is a winged helix-turnhelix DNA-binding protein that functions as a global
regulator in bacteria and is also important in pathogenesis. A detailed
mechanistic picture of how OmpR binds to DNA and activates transcription is
lacking. We used NMR spectroscopy to solve the solution structure of the
C-terminal domain of OmpR (OmpR(C)) and to analyze the chemical shift changes
that occur upon DNA binding. There is little overlap in the interaction surface
with residues of PhoB that were reportedly involved in protein/protein
interactions in its head-to-tail dimer. Multiple factors account for the lack of 
overlap. One is that the spacing between the OmpR half-sites is shorter than
observed with PhoB, requiring the arrangement of the two OmpR molecules to be
different from that of the PhoB dimer on DNA. A second is the demonstration
herein that OmpR can bind to its high affinity site as a monomer. As a result,
OmpR(C) appears to be capable of adopting alternative orientations depending on
the precise base composition of the binding site, which also contributes to the
lack of overlap. In the presence of DNA, chemical shift changes occur in OmpR in 
the recognition alpha-helix 3, the loop between beta-strand 4 and alpha-helix 1, 
and the loop between beta-strands 5 and 6. DNA contact residues are Val(203) (T),
Arg(207) (G), and Arg(209) (phosphate backbone). Our results suggest that OmpR
binds to DNA as a monomer and then forms a symmetric or asymmetric dimer,
depending on the binding site. We propose that during activation OmpR binds to
DNA and undergoes a conformational change that promotes phosphorylation of the
N-terminal receiver domain, the receiver domains dimerize, and then the second
monomer binds to DNA. The flexible linker of OmpR enables the second monomer to
bind in multiple orientations (head-to-tail and head-to-head), depending on the
specific DNA contacts.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M705550200 
PMCID: PMC2417188
PMID: 18195018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (astA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Nov 21;8:2278. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02278. eCollection
2017.

Characterization of Colistin-Resistant Escherichia coli Isolated from Diseased
Pigs in France.

Delannoy S(1), Le Devendec L(2)(3), Jouy E(2)(3), Fach P(1), Drider D(4), Kempf
I(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Alimentation, de l'Environnement
et du Travail, Food Safety Laboratory, Université Paris-Est, Maisons-Alfort,
France.
(2)Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Alimentation, de l'Environnement
et du Travail, Ploufragan Laboratory, Ploufragan, France.
(3)Université Bretagne Loire, Rennes, France.
(4)Institut Charles Viollette, Université de Lille, Lille, France.

We studied a collection of 79 colistin-resistant Escherichia coli isolates
isolated from diseased pigs in France between 2009 and 2013. We determined a
number of phenotypic and genetic characters using broth microdilution to
characterize their antimicrobial susceptibility. We performed pulse field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) to assess their genetic diversity and assign them to
phylogroups. High-throughput real-time PCR micro-array was used to screen for a
selection of genetic markers of virulence, and PCR and sequencing of the main
recognized resistance genes allowed us to investigate the mechanisms of colistin 
resistance. Results showed that isolates belonged to several phylogroups and most
had a unique PFGE profile. More than 50% of the isolates were also resistant to
sulfonamides, trimethoprim, tetracycline, ampicillin or chloramphenicol. The
mcr-1 gene was detected in 70 out of 79 isolates and was transferred by
conjugation in 33 of them, sometimes together with resistance to sulfonamides,
trimethoprim, tetracycline, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, cefotaxime, or
gentamicin. Mutations in the amino-acid sequences of proteins MgrB, PhoP, PhoQ,
PmrB, but not PmrA, were detected in isolates with or without the mcr-1 gene.
More than one-third of the isolates harbored the F18, F4, astA, hlyA, estI,
estII, elt, stx2e, iha, orfA, orfB, paa, terE, ecs1763, or ureD virulence
markers. In conclusion, although most isolates had a unique PFGE profile, a few
particular combinations of phylogenetic groups, virulence genes and mutations in 
the sequenced genes involved in colistin resistance were identified on a number
of occasions, suggesting the persistence of certain isolates over several years.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02278 
PMCID: PMC5702452
PMID: 29209292 


############# ((phoP) AND (fadD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2001 May;183(9):2733-45.

Roles of hilC and hilD in regulation of hilA expression in Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium.

Lucas RL(1), Lee CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Sequences between -332 and -39 upstream of the hilA promoter are required for
repression of hilA. An unidentified repressor is thought to bind these upstream
repressing sequences (URS) to inhibit hilA expression. Two AraC-like
transcriptional regulators encoded on Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI1),
HilC and HilD, bind to the URS to counteract the repression of hilA. The URS is
required for regulation of hilA by osmolarity, oxygen, PhoP/PhoQ, and SirA/BarA. 
Here, we show that FadD, FliZ, PhoB, and EnvZ/OmpR also require the URS to
regulate hilA. These environmental and regulatory factors may affect hilA
expression by altering the expression or activity of HilC, HilD, or the unknown
repressor. To begin investigating these possibilities, we tested the effects of
environmental and regulatory factors on hilC and hilD expression. We also
examined hilA regulation when hilC or hilD was disrupted or expressed to a high
level. Although hilC is regulated by all environmental conditions and regulatory 
factors that modulate hilA expression, hilC is not required for the regulation of
hilA by any conditions or factors except EnvZ/OmpR. In contrast, hilD is
absolutely required for hilA expression, but environmental conditions and
regulatory factors have little or no effect on hilD expression. We speculate that
EnvZ/OmpR regulates hilA by altering the expression and/or activity of hilC,
while all other regulatory conditions and mutations regulate hilA by modulating
hilD posttranscriptionally. We also discuss models in which the regulation of
hilA expression is mediated by modulation of the expression or activity of one or
more repressors.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.9.2733-2745.2001 
PMCID: PMC99488
PMID: 11292791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (fic)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Jun;5(6):e1193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001193. Epub 
2011 Jun 7.

Interferon-γ and proliferation responses to Salmonella enterica Serotype Typhi
proteins in patients with S. Typhi Bacteremia in Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Sheikh A(1), Khanam F, Sayeed MA, Rahman T, Pacek M, Hu Y, Rollins A, Bhuiyan MS,
Rollins S, Kalsy A, Arifuzzaman M, Leung DT, Sarracino DA, Krastins B, Charles
RC, Larocque RC, Cravioto A, Calderwood SB, Brooks WA, Harris JB, Labaer J, Qadri
F, Ryan ET.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B),
Dhaka, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi is a human-restricted
intracellular pathogen and the cause of typhoid fever. Cellular immune responses 
are required to control and clear Salmonella infection. Despite this, there are
limited data on cellular immune responses in humans infected with wild type S.
Typhi.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: For this work, we used an automated approach to
purify a subset of S. Typhi proteins identified in previous antibody-based
immuno-affinity screens and antigens known to be expressed in vivo, including
StaF-putative fimbrial protein-STY0202, StbB-fimbrial chaperone-STY0372,
CsgF-involved in curli production-STY1177, CsgD- putative regulatory
protein-STY1179, OppA-periplasmic oligopeptide binding protein precursor-STY1304,
PagC-outer membrane invasion protein-STY1878, and conserved hypothetical
protein-STY2195; we also generated and analyzed a crude membrane preparation of
S. Typhi (MP). In comparison to samples collected from uninfected Bangladeshi and
North American participants, we detected significant interferon-γ responses in
PBMCs stimulated with MP, StaF, StbB, CsgF, CsgD, OppA, STY2195, and PagC in
patients bacteremic with S. Typhi in Bangladesh. The majority of interferon-γ
expressing T cells were CD4 cells, although CD8 responses also occurred. We also 
assessed cellular proliferation responses in bacteremic patients, and confirmed
increased responses in infected individuals to MP, StaF, STY2195, and PagC in
convalescent compared to acute phase samples and compared to controls. StaF is a 
fimbrial protein homologous to E. coli YadK, and contains a Pfam motif thought to
be involved in cellular adhesion. PagC is expressed in vivo under the control of 
the virulence-associated PhoP-regulon required for intra-macrophage survival of
Salmonella. STY2195 is a conserved hypothetical protein of unknown function.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first analysis of cellular immune responses 
to purified S. Typhi antigens in patients with typhoid fever. These results
indicate that patients generate significant CD4 and CD8 interferon-γ responses to
specific S. Typhi antigens during typhoid fever, and that these responses are
elevated at the time of clinical presentation. These observations suggest that an
interferon-γ based detection system could be used to diagnose individuals with
typhoid fever during the acute stage of illness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001193 
PMCID: PMC3110156
PMID: 21666798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (iraP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 5;103(36):13503-8. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

The PhoP/PhoQ two-component system stabilizes the alternative sigma factor RpoS
in Salmonella enterica.

Tu X(1), Latifi T, Bougdour A, Gottesman S, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The sigma factor RpoS regulates the expression of many stress response genes and 
is required for virulence in several bacterial species. We now report that RpoS
accumulates when Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is growing
logarithmically in media with low Mg(2+) concentrations. This process requires
the two-component regulatory system PhoP/PhoQ, which is specifically activated in
low Mg(2+). We show that PhoP controls RpoS protein turnover by serving as a
transcriptional activator of the iraP (yaiB) gene, which encodes a product that
enhances RpoS stability by interacting with RssB, the protein that normally
delivers RpoS to the ClpXP protease for degradation. Mutation of the phoP gene
rendered Salmonella as sensitive to hydrogen peroxide as an rpoS mutant after
growth in low Mg(2+). In Escherichia coli, low Mg(2+) leads to only modest RpoS
stabilization, and iraP is not regulated by PhoP/PhoQ. These findings add the
sigma factor RpoS to the regulatory proteins and two-component systems that are
elevated in a PhoP/PhoQ-dependent fashion when Salmonella face low Mg(2+)
environments. Our data also exemplify the critical differences in regulatory
circuits that exist between the closely related enteric bacteria Salmonella and
E. coli.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0606026103 
PMCID: PMC1557385
PMID: 16938894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (kdpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003201. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

The KdpD/KdpE two-component system: integrating K⁺ homeostasis and virulence.

Freeman ZN(1), Dorus S, Waterfield NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

The two-component system (TCS) KdpD/KdpE, extensively studied for its regulatory 
role in potassium (K(+)) transport, has more recently been identified as an
adaptive regulator involved in the virulence and intracellular survival of
pathogenic bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, entero-haemorrhagic
Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Yersinia pestis, Francisella species,
Photorhabdus asymbiotica, and mycobacteria. Key homeostasis requirements
monitored by KdpD/KdpE and other TCSs such as PhoP/PhoQ are critical to survival 
in the stressful conditions encountered by pathogens during host interactions. It
follows these TCSs may therefore acquire adaptive roles in response to selective 
pressures associated with adopting a pathogenic lifestyle. Given the central role
of K(+) in virulence, we propose that KdpD/KdpE, as a regulator of a
high-affinity K(+) pump, has evolved virulence-related regulatory functions. In
support of this hypothesis, we review the role of KdpD/KdpE in bacterial
infection and summarize evidence that (i) KdpD/KdpE production is correlated with
enhanced virulence and survival, (ii) KdpE regulates a range of virulence loci
through direct promoter binding, and (iii) KdpD/KdpE regulation responds to
virulence-related conditions including phagocytosis, exposure to microbicides,
quorum sensing signals, and host hormones. Furthermore, antimicrobial stress,
osmotic stress, and oxidative stress are associated with KdpD/KdpE activity, and 
the system's accessory components (which allow TCS fine-tuning or crosstalk)
provide links to stress response pathways. KdpD/KdpE therefore appears to be an
important adaptive TCS employed during host infection, promoting bacterial
virulence and survival through mechanisms both related to and distinct from its
conserved role in K(+) regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201 
PMCID: PMC3610689
PMID: 23555240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (kdpE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003201. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

The KdpD/KdpE two-component system: integrating K⁺ homeostasis and virulence.

Freeman ZN(1), Dorus S, Waterfield NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

The two-component system (TCS) KdpD/KdpE, extensively studied for its regulatory 
role in potassium (K(+)) transport, has more recently been identified as an
adaptive regulator involved in the virulence and intracellular survival of
pathogenic bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, entero-haemorrhagic
Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Yersinia pestis, Francisella species,
Photorhabdus asymbiotica, and mycobacteria. Key homeostasis requirements
monitored by KdpD/KdpE and other TCSs such as PhoP/PhoQ are critical to survival 
in the stressful conditions encountered by pathogens during host interactions. It
follows these TCSs may therefore acquire adaptive roles in response to selective 
pressures associated with adopting a pathogenic lifestyle. Given the central role
of K(+) in virulence, we propose that KdpD/KdpE, as a regulator of a
high-affinity K(+) pump, has evolved virulence-related regulatory functions. In
support of this hypothesis, we review the role of KdpD/KdpE in bacterial
infection and summarize evidence that (i) KdpD/KdpE production is correlated with
enhanced virulence and survival, (ii) KdpE regulates a range of virulence loci
through direct promoter binding, and (iii) KdpD/KdpE regulation responds to
virulence-related conditions including phagocytosis, exposure to microbicides,
quorum sensing signals, and host hormones. Furthermore, antimicrobial stress,
osmotic stress, and oxidative stress are associated with KdpD/KdpE activity, and 
the system's accessory components (which allow TCS fine-tuning or crosstalk)
provide links to stress response pathways. KdpD/KdpE therefore appears to be an
important adaptive TCS employed during host infection, promoting bacterial
virulence and survival through mechanisms both related to and distinct from its
conserved role in K(+) regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201 
PMCID: PMC3610689
PMID: 23555240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (pmrD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Feb 17;65(3). pii: e00889-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00889-20. Print 2021 Feb 17.

Effects of Regulatory Network Organization and Environment on PmrD Connector
Activity and Polymyxin Resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli.

Chen AI(1), Albicoro FJ(2), Zhu J(3), Goulian M(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA goulian@sas.upenn.edu.
(5)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Polymyxins are a class of cyclic peptides with antimicrobial activity against
Gram-negative bacteria. In Enterobacteriaceae, the PhoQ/PhoP and PmrB/PmrA
two-component systems regulate many genes that confer resistance to both
polymyxins and host antimicrobial peptides. The activities of these two-component
systems are modulated by additional proteins that are conserved across
Enterobacteriaceae, such as MgrB, a negative regulator of PhoQ, and PmrD, a
"connector" protein that activates PmrB/PmrA in response to PhoQ/PhoP
stimulation. Despite the conservation of many protein components of the
PhoQ/PhoP-PmrD-PmrB/PmrA network, the specific molecular interactions and
regulatory mechanisms vary across different genera. Here, we explore the role of 
PmrD in modulating this signaling network in Klebsiella pneumoniae and
Escherichia coli We show that in K. pneumoniae, PmrD is not required for
polymyxin resistance arising from mutation of mgrB-the most common cause of
spontaneous polymyxin resistance in this bacterium-suggesting that direct
activation of polymyxin resistance genes by PhoQ/PhoP plays a critical role in
this resistance pathway. However, for conditions of low pH or intermediate iron
concentrations, both of which stimulate PmrB/PmrA, we find that PmrD does
contribute to resistance. We further show that in E. coli, PmrD functions as a
connector between PhoQ/PhoP and PmrB/PmrA, in contrast with previous reports. In 
this case, activity also depends on PmrB/PmrA stimulation, or on very high
activation of PhoQ/PhoP. Our results indicate that the importance of the PmrD
connector in modulating the polymyxin resistance network depends on both the
network organization and on the environmental conditions associated with PmrB
stimulation.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00889-20 
PMCID: PMC8092550
PMID: 33361295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Dec;166(12):1149-1159. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000988.

Molecular basis of bile-salt- and iron-induced enterohaemorrhagic E. coli
resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides.

Kunwar CB(1), Birstonas S(1), McPhee JB(1), Barnett Foster D(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biology, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Colonization of the gastrointestinal tract by enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli
(EHEC) is critically dependent on its ability to sense and respond to various
microenvironments within the host. EHEC exposure to physiologically relevant
levels of bile salts upregulates the two-component system, pmrAB, and the
arnBCADTEF operon, resulting in lipopolysaccharide modification and increased
resistance to the cationic antimicrobial peptide, polymyxin B (PMB). A similar
pmrAB- and arn-dependent PMB resistance has been observed in Salmonella enterica 
in the presence of ferric iron. Limiting magnesium levels and mild acid can also 
induce Salmonella resistance to PMB through another two-component system, PhoPQ
and the connector protein, PmrD. This study aims to evaluate the relative
contributions of a bile-salt mix (BSM), iron, limiting magnesium as well as the
roles of pmrAB, phoPQ and pmrD to EHEC's resistance to PMB. Killing assays show
that EHEC treatment with the BSM or iron under excess magnesium and neutral pH
conditions induces a pmrAB-dependent, phoP-independent PMB resistance. By
contrast, exposure to limiting magnesium triggers a pmrB-, phoP- and
pmrD-dependent PMB resistance. The iron-induced PMB resistance is independent of 
phoP and pmrD under limiting magnesium conditions while the bile-salt-induced PMB
resistance is independent of pmrD only under non-PhoP-inducing conditions.
GFP-pmrD transcriptional reporter studies reveal that the limiting magnesium
enhances pmrD expression, which is repressed upon additional exposure to either
BSM or iron. Our results also show that exposure to mild acid enhances PMB
resistance in a pmrD-independent manner and GFP reporter results confirm minimal 
expression of pmrD at this pH regardless of the magnesium level. This study
provides novel insights into how EHEC differentially employs PmrAB, PhoPQ and
PmrD to monitor and respond to bile salts, iron, acidic pH and magnesium
typically encountered within the gastrointestinal tract in order to modulate its 
survival against cationic antimicrobial peptides.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000988 
PMID: 33205745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Oct 23;12:3291-3299. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S225383.
eCollection 2019.

Characterization Of Chromosome-Mediated Colistin Resistance In Escherichia coli
Isolates From Livestock In Korea.

Kim S(1), Woo JH(1), Kim N(1), Kim MH(1), Kim SY(1), Son JH(1), Moon DC(2), Lim
SK(2), Shin M(1), Lee JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(2)Bacterial Disease Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Gimcheon-si,
Gyeongsangbuk-do, Republic of Korea.

Purpose: Colistin resistance in gram-negative bacteria from humans and livestock 
has been increasingly reported worldwide. The aim of this study was to
investigate the underlying mechanisms of chromosome-mediated colistin resistance 
in Escherichia coli isolates from livestock in Korea.
Materials and methods: Thirty mcr-1-negative isolates were selected from a
collection of colistin-resistant E. coli isolates collected from livestock in
2005 and 2015 in Korea. Amino acid alterations in PmrAB, PhoPQ, MgrB, and PmrD
were investigated. Colistin-resistant derivatives were produced by serial passage
of colistin-susceptible E. coli isolates in colistin-containing media.
Results: Thirty colistin-resistant mcr-negative E. coli isolates were classified 
into 26 sequence types. Twenty-two isolates carried diverse amino acid
alterations in PmrB, PhoP, PhoQ, MgrB, and/or PmrD, whereas no mutation in any of
these genes was found in the remaining eight isolates. Sixteen out of the 22
isolates shared a total of nine polymorphic positions that were found in
colistin-susceptible E. coli strains. Colistin-resistant derivatives from two
colistin-susceptible isolates showed the same genetic alterations that were
observed in colistin-resistant clinical isolates.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that the mechanism underlying chromosome-mediated
colistin resistance remain to be discovered in E. coli. Selective pressure of
colistin in vitro induced the same genetic mutations associated with colistin
resistance in vivo. Efforts to reduce colistin consumption in livestock should be
redoubled, to prevent the occurrence of colistin-resistant E. coli strains.

© 2019 Kim et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S225383 
PMCID: PMC6815941
PMID: 31695448 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


4. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Apr;59(4):2051-61. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05052-14.
Epub 2015 Jan 20.

PmrD is required for modifications to escherichia coli endotoxin that promote
antimicrobial resistance.

Rubin EJ(1), Herrera CM(2), Crofts AA(2), Trent MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA Center for Infectious Disease, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA strent@austin.utexas.edu.

In Salmonella enterica, PmrD is a connector protein that links the two-component 
systems PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB. While Escherichia coli encodes a PmrD homolog,
it is thought to be incapable of connecting PhoPQ and PmrAB in this organism due 
to functional divergence from the S. enterica protein. However, our laboratory
previously observed that low concentrations of Mg(2+), a PhoPQ-activating signal,
leads to the induction of PmrAB-dependent lipid A modifications in wild-type E.
coli (C. M. Herrera, J. V. Hankins, and M. S. Trent, Mol Microbiol 76:1444-1460, 
2010, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07150.x). These modifications
include phosphoethanolamine (pEtN) and 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose (l-Ara4N),
which promote bacterial resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs)
when affixed to lipid A. Here, we demonstrate that pmrD is required for
modification of the lipid A domain of E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) under
low-Mg(2+) growth conditions. Further, RNA sequencing shows that E. coli pmrD
influences the expression of pmrA and its downstream targets, including genes
coding for the modification enzymes that transfer pEtN and l-Ara4N to the lipid A
molecule. In line with these findings, a pmrD mutant is dramatically impaired in 
survival compared with the wild-type strain when exposed to the CAMP polymyxin B.
Notably, we also reveal the presence of an unknown factor or system capable of
activating pmrD to promote lipid A modification in the absence of the PhoPQ
system. These results illuminate a more complex network of protein interactions
surrounding activation of PhoPQ and PmrAB in E. coli than previously understood.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05052-14 
PMCID: PMC4356761
PMID: 25605366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Struct Biol. 2014 Dec 5;14:24. doi: 10.1186/s12900-014-0024-y.

Structural insights into Escherichia coli polymyxin B resistance protein D with
X-ray crystallography and small-angle X-ray scattering.

Jo H(1), Jeong EY(2), Jeon J(3), Ban C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
jhhsst@postech.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
eyjeong@postech.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
sung0214@postech.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
ciban@postech.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Polymyxin B resistance protein D (PmrD) plays a key role in the
polymyxin B-resistance pathway, as it is the signaling protein that can act as a 
specific connecter between PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ. We conducted structural
analysis to characterize Escherichia coli (E. coli) PmrD, which exhibits
different features compared with PmrD in other bacteria.
RESULTS: The X-ray crystal structure of E. coli PmrD was determined at a 2.00 Å
resolution, revealing novel information such as the unambiguous secondary
structures of the protein and the presence of a disulfide bond. Furthermore,
various assays such as native gel electrophoresis, surface plasmon resonance
(SPR), size-exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and
small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements, were performed to elucidate the
structural and functional role of the internal disulfide bond in E. coli PmrD.
CONCLUSIONS: The structural characteristics of E. coli PmrD were clearly
identified via diverse techniques. The findings help explain the different
protective mechanism of E. coli compared to other Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12900-014-0024-y 
PMCID: PMC4263063
PMID: 25480013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002184. Epub 2011 
Jul 21.

Ancestral genes can control the ability of horizontally acquired loci to confer
new traits.

Chen HD(1), Jewett MW, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Horizontally acquired genes typically function as autonomous units conferring new
abilities when introduced into different species. However, we reasoned that
proteins preexisting in an organism might constrain the functionality of a
horizontally acquired gene product if it operates on an ancestral pathway. Here, 
we determine how the horizontally acquired pmrD gene product activates the
ancestral PmrA/PmrB two-component system in Salmonella enterica but not in the
closely related bacterium Escherichia coli. The Salmonella PmrD protein binds to 
the phosphorylated PmrA protein (PmrA-P), protecting it from dephosphorylation by
the PmrB protein. This results in transcription of PmrA-dependent genes,
including those conferring polymyxin B resistance. We now report that the E. coli
PmrD protein can activate the PmrA/PmrB system in Salmonella even though it
cannot do it in E. coli, suggesting that these two species differ in an
additional component controlling PmrA-P levels. We establish that the E. coli
PmrB displays higher phosphatase activity towards PmrA-P than the Salmonella
PmrB, and we identified a PmrB subdomain responsible for this property.
Replacement of the E. coli pmrB gene with the Salmonella homolog was sufficient
to render E. coli resistant to polymyxin B under PmrD-inducing conditions. Our
findings provide a singular example whereby quantitative differences in the
biochemical activities of orthologous ancestral proteins dictate the ability of a
horizontally acquired gene product to confer species-specific traits. And they
suggest that horizontally acquired genes can potentiate selection at ancestral
loci.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002184 
PMCID: PMC3140997
PMID: 21811415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


7. Int J Biol Macromol. 2009 Jun 1;44(5):393-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.02.006.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Insights into the structure of the PmrD protein with molecular dynamics
simulations.

Tatsis VA(1), Tsoulos IG, Krinas CS, Alexopoulos C, Stavrakoudis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information and Telecommunications Engineering, University of
West Macedonia, Kozani, Greece.

Resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B from Gram-negative
bacteria is accomplished by two-component systems (TCSs), protein complexes
PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ. PmrD is the first protein identified to mediate the
connectivity between two TCSs. The 3D structure of PmrD has been recently solved 
by NMR and its unique fold was revealed. Here, a molecular dynamics study is
presented started from the NMR structure. Numerous hydrophobic and electrostatic 
interactions were identified to contribute to PmrD's 3D stability. Moreover, the 
mobility of the five loops that connect the protein's six beta-strands has been
explored. Solvent-accessible surface area calculation revealed that a
Leucine-rich hydrophobic cluster of the protein stabilized the protein's
structure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.02.006 
PMID: 19428472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 5;361(4):1033-7. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

First structure of the polymyxin resistance proteins.

Fu W(1), Yang F, Kang X, Zhang X, Li Y, Xia B, Jin C.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center, Peking University, No. 5,
Yi-He-Yuan, Beijing 100871, China.

PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ are a pair of two-component systems (TCSs) that allow the
Gram-negative bacteria to survive the cationic antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B.
The two TCSs are linked by the polymyxin resistance protein, PmrD. The
PhoP-activated PmrD protects the phosphorylated response regulator PmrA from
dephosphorylation, and promotes the transcription of PmrA-activated genes
responsible for polymyxin resistance. PmrD is the first protein identified to
mediate the connectivity between two TCSs by protecting the phosphorylated
response regulator of the downstream TCS. PmrD shows no homology to proteins with
known structures. We present here the solution structure of PmrD from Escherichia
coli, the first three-dimensional structure of the PmrD family. Our study
provides the structural basis of the novel interacting mechanism of bacterial
two-component signal-transduction systems.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.07.144 
PMID: 17686460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Trends Biochem Sci. 2005 Feb;30(2):70-2.

A novel mechanism for connecting bacterial two-component signal-transduction
systems.

Eguchi Y(1), Utsumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture of 
Kinki University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Bacteria have many two-component signal-transduction systems (TCSs) that respond 
to specific environmental signals by altering the phosphorylated state of a
response regulator. Although these systems are presumed to form an intricate
signal network, the detailed mechanism of how they interact with each other
remains largely unexplained. In a recent study of Salmonella, two TCSs have been 
discovered to be connected by a protein that protects a response regulator from
dephosphorylation promoted by its cognate sensor kinase. This novel mechanism
might provide an answer to some of the linkages found between other TCSs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2004.12.003 
PMID: 15691651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (proP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2004 May;186(10):3006-14.

Signal transduction cascade between EvgA/EvgS and PhoP/PhoQ two-component systems
of Escherichia coli.

Eguchi Y(1), Okada T, Minagawa S, Oshima T, Mori H, Yamamoto K, Ishihama A,
Utsumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture,
Kinki University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional analysis of a constitutively active mutant of the EvgA/EvgS
two-component system of Escherichia coli resulted in enhanced expression of 13
PhoP/PhoQ-regulated genes, crcA, hemL, mgtA, ompT, phoP, phoQ, proP, rstA, rstB, 
slyB, ybjG, yrbL, and mgrB. This regulatory network between the two systems also 
occurred as a result of overproduction of the EvgA regulator; however, enhanced
transcription of the phoPQ genes did not further activate expression of the
PhoP/PhoQ-regulated genes. These results demonstrated signal transduction from
the EvgA/EvgS system to the PhoP/PhoQ system in E. coli and also identified the
genes that required the two systems for enhanced expression. This is one example 
of the intricate signal transduction networks that are posited to exist in E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.10.3006-3014.2004 
PMCID: PMC400602
PMID: 15126461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (ugd)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):50588-95. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

Signal-dependent requirement for the co-activator protein RcsA in transcription
of the RcsB-regulated ugd gene.

Mouslim C(1), Latifi T, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The RcsC/YojN/RcsB phosphorelay system controls gene expression in response to a 
variety of signals, including changes in temperature, osmolarity, and
overproduction of membrane proteins. Transcription of certain RcsB-activated
genes, such as the capsule synthesis cps operon, requires the co-activator
protein RcsA, whereas expression of other RcsB-activated genes is
RcsA-independent. We have established previously that a tolB mutation induces
transcription of the Salmonella UDP-glucose dehydrogenase ugd gene in an RcsA-
and RcsB-dependent manner. This induction is independent of the two-component
systems PhoP/PhoQ and PmrA/PmrB, which are required for ugd expression in
response to low Mg2+. We now report that the RcsC/YojN/RcsB system is activated
in a pmrA mutant experiencing Fe3+ and low Mg2+, resulting in expression of both 
cps and ugd genes. However, whereas cps transcription remained RcsA-dependent,
ugd transcription became RcsA-independent but dependent on the PhoP protein. S1
mapping experiments demonstrated that RcsA-dependent and -independent
transcription of the ugd gene use the same promoter. DNase footprinting analysis 
identified a PhoP-binding site in the ugd promoter. Yet, PhoP-mediated ugd
transcription required either the RcsC/YojN/RcsB or the PmrA/PmrB systems.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309433200 
PMID: 14514676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (ybjX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Res Vet Sci. 2019 Aug;125:279-284. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.008. Epub 2019 Jul
12.

Outer membrane proteins YbjX and PagP co-regulate motility in Escherichia coli
via the bacterial chemotaxis pathway.

Song X(1), Hou M(1), Tu J(1), Xue M(1), Shao Y(1), Jiang H(1), Liu H(1), Xue
T(1), Wang G(1), Qi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, PR China.
(2)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, PR China. Electronic address: qkz@ahau.edu.cn.

Mutation of the PhoP/Q two-component system decreases the expression of ybjX and 
pagP encoding outer membrane proteins, and mutation of ybjX or pagP attenuates
avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) pathogenicity. However, whether
ybjX/pagP mutation (double-deletion mutant) has a synergistic effect on
pathogenicity remains unknown. Herein, electrophoresis mobility shift assay
(EMSA) experiments showed that the PhoP/Q system regulated ybjX and pagP
transcription indirectly. The APECΔybjX/pagP mutant strain, constructed using the
Red recombination method, exhibited reduced invasion of chicken embryo fibroblast
(DF-1) cells, but had no effect on virulence in a chicken model. Using RNA
sequencing to identify differential mRNAs in APECΔybjXΔpagP and native strains,
we revealed up-regulation of genes involved in the bacterial chemotaxis pathway. 
The ybjX/pagP mutant strain displayed significantly increased motility,
suggesting that double deletion of ybjX and pagP enhances motility via the
bacterial chemotaxis pathway.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.008 
PMID: 31326704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Avian Pathol. 2018 Jun;47(3):294-299. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1448053. Epub
2018 Mar 27.

The role of the outer membrane protein gene ybjX in the pathogenicity of avian
pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Song X(1), Li C(1), Qi K(1), Tu J(1), Liu H(1), Xue T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease
Control, College of Animal Science and Technology , Anhui Agricultural University
, Hefei , People's Republic of China.

Avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) are important pathogens that cause
serious economic losses to the poultry industry worldwide. The PhoP/Q system is
essential for APEC pathogenicity, and its mutation leads to a decrease in ybjX
gene expression, but whether ybjX regulated by PhoP/Q plays a role in
pathogenicity remains unclear. The role of ybjX in APEC pathogenicity was
investigated using a ybjX mutant strain constructed from APEC strain AE17 by the 
Red recombination method. The mutant strain displayed significantly reduced
adherence to and invasion of chicken embryo fibroblast cell line (DF-1) cells.
Moreover, N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine (NPN) assays revealed an increase in outer
membrane permeabilization for the ybjX mutant, suggesting ybjX affected
susceptibility to avian beta-defensin through this mechanism. The ybjX mutation
increased susceptibility to avian beta-defensin 9 (AvBD9), and in vivo LD50
assays revealed reduced bacterial virulence in a chicken model. Taken together,
these results indicated that mutation of ybjX may attenuate APEC pathogenicity,
not only by affecting bacterial adhesion and invasion, but also via reducing
resistance to avian beta-defensin by increasing outer membrane permeabilization
of bacteria.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1448053 
PMID: 29517278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoQ) AND (phoP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Basic Microbiol. 2021 Sep 12. doi: 10.1002/jobm.202100355. [Epub ahead of
print]

Subinhibitory concentration stress of colistin enhanced PhoPQ expression in
Escherichia coli harboring mcr-1.

Elizabeth R(1), Wangkheimayum J(1), Singha KM(2), Chanda DD(2), Bhattacharjee
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Assam University, Silchar, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar,
Assam, India.

The increased and inappropriate use of colistin led to the emergence of its
resistance among Gram-negative bacterial isolates and the most common mechanism
of colistin resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is the modification of the
lipopolysaccharide mediated by two-component regulatory systems, PhoPQ and PmrAB.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the transcriptional expression of
the PhoPQ system against colistin stress in clinical isolates of Escherichia coli
with colistin-resistant phenotype. Six colistin-resistant E. coli isolates were
obtained from Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar that were of clinical
origin and received for routine culture and sensitivity testing. Screening for
colistin resistance was done by broth microdilution method and further screened
for the presence of the different types of plasmid-mediated colistin resistance
mcr genes namely, mcr-1 to mcr-10 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
screened positive isolates were subjected to PCR assay targeting phoP and phoQ
genes and their expression was measured by quantitative real-time PCR. The
results of this study revealed that two E. coli isolates (TS2 and TS4) were found
to carry the mcr-1 gene. PhoP and PhoQ gene amplification was observed in all the
isolates. Transcriptional analysis showed that the isolates harboring the mcr-1
gene showed an enhanced level of expression in the PhoP, PhoQ genes in the
presence of a subinhibitory concentration of colistin whereas no significant
expression was observed for the isolates which were devoid of the mcr gene. This 
study demonstrates the involvement of mcr-1 in the PhoPQ system in clinical
isolates of colistin-resistant E. coli which will help in designing a molecular
marker for detecting colistin-resistant E. coli and contribute to the assessment 
of resistance burden and infection control strategy.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.202100355 
PMID: 34510495 


2. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Aug 10;14:3041-3051. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S324303.
eCollection 2021.

Acquisition of the mcr-1 Gene Lowers the Target Mutation to Impede the Evolution 
of a High-Level Colistin-Resistant Mutant in Escherichia coli.

Huang C(1)(2), Shi Q(2), Zhang S(2), Wu H(1), Xiao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ningbo Medical Center Lihuili Hospital,
Ningbo, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Objective: The spread of the plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1
poses a significant public health threat. Little information is available on the 
development of high-level colistin-resistant mutants (HLCRMs) in MCR-1-producing 
Escherichia coli (MCRPEC). The present study was designed to evaluate the impact 
of chromosomal modifications in pmrAB, phoPQ, and mgrB combined with mcr-1 on
colistin resistance in E. coli.
Methods: Five MCRPEC and three non-MCRPEC (E. coli ATCC25922 and two
plasmid-curing) strains were used. The HLCRMs were selected through
multi-stepwise colistin exposure. Moreover, two E. coli C600-pMCRs were
constructed and used for selection of HLCRMs. Further analysis included mutation 
rates and DNA sequencing. Transcripts of pmrABC, phoP, mgrB, and mcr-1 were
quantified by real-time quantitative PCR.
Results: All tested HLCRMs were successfully isolated from their parental
strains. Non-MCRPEC strains had higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs)
and mutation rates than MCRPEC strains. Nineteen amino acid substitutions were
identified: seven in PmrA, six in PmrB, one in PhoP, three in PhoQ, and two in
MgrB. Most were detected in non-MCRPEC strains. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant 
predicted that four substitutions, PmrA Gly15Arg, Gly53Arg, PmrB Pro94Gln, and
PhoP Asp86Gly, affected protein function. Two HLCRM isolates did not show amino
acid substitutions in contrast to their parental MCRPEC isolates. No further
mutations were detected in the second- and third-step mutants. Further
transcriptional analysis showed that the up-regulation of pmrCAB expression was
greater in the mutant of E. coli C600 than in E. coli C600-pMCR.
Conclusion: Acquisition of the mcr-1 gene had a negative impact on the
development of HLCRMs in E. coli, but was associated with low-level colistin
resistance. Thus, colistin-based combination regimens may be effective against
infections with MCR-1-producing isolates.

© 2021 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S324303 
PMCID: PMC8364431
PMID: 34408448 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


3. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jul 28;12:682205. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205.
eCollection 2021.

MgrB Inactivation Confers Trimethoprim Resistance in Escherichia coli.

Shi H(1)(2), Li T(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Yang S(1)(2), Zhang XE(3), Tao
S(4), Gu J(1), Deng JY(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of TB Systems Biology and Translational
Medicine, Foshan, China.

After several decades of use, trimethoprim (TMP) remains one of the key access
antimicrobial drugs listed by the World Health Organization. To circumvent the
problem of trimethoprim resistance worldwide, a better understanding of
drug-resistance mechanisms is required. In this study, we screened the
single-gene knockout library of Escherichia coli, and identified mgrB and other
several genes involved in trimethoprim resistance. Subsequent comparative
transcriptional analysis between ΔmgrB and the wild-type strain showed that
expression levels of phoP, phoQ, and folA were significantly upregulated in
ΔmgrB. Further deleting phoP or phoQ could partially restore trimethoprim
sensitivity to ΔmgrB, and co-overexpression of phoP/Q caused TMP resistance,
suggesting the involvement of PhoP/Q in trimethoprim resistance. Correspondingly,
MgrB and PhoP were shown to be able to modulated folA expression in vivo. After
that, efforts were made to test if PhoP could directly modulate the expression of
folA. Though phosphorylated PhoP could bind to the promotor region of folA in
vitro, the former only provided a weak protection on the latter as shown by the
DNA footprinting assay. In addition, deleting the deduced PhoP box in ΔmgrB could
only slightly reverse the TMP resistance phenotype, suggesting that it is less
likely for PhoP to directly modulate the transcription of folA. Taken together,
our data suggested that, in E. coli, MgrB affects susceptibility to trimethoprim 
by modulating the expression of folA with the involvement of PhoP/Q. This work
broadens our understanding of the regulation of folate metabolism and the
mechanisms of TMP resistance in bacteria.

Copyright © 2021 Shi, Li, Xu, Yu, Yang, Zhang, Tao, Gu and Deng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205 
PMCID: PMC8355897
PMID: 34394028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


4. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Aug 5. doi: 10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5. [Epub ahead
of print]

Increased Synthesis of a Magnesium Transporter MgtA During Recombinant
Autotransporter Expression in Escherichia coli.

Petrovskaya LE(1), Ziganshin RH(2), Kryukova EA(2)(3), Zlobinov AV(2), Gapizov
SS(2)(3)(4), Shingarova LN(2), Mironov VA(5), Lomakina GY(6)(7), Dolgikh
DA(2)(3)(4), Kirpichnikov MP(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
lpetr65@yahoo.com.
(2)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
(3)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Kosygina str., 4, Moscow, 119334,
Russia.
(4)Department of Biology, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
gory, 1, Moscow, 119234, Russia.
(5)Roche Diagnostics Rus LLC, Letnikovskaya str. 2/2, Moscow, 115114, Russia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1/3, Moscow, 119991, Russia.
(7)Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Baumanskaya 2-ya, 5/1, Moscow,
105005, Russia.

Overproduction of the membrane proteins in Escherichia coli cells is a common
approach to obtain sufficient material for their functional and structural
studies. However, the efficiency of this process can be limited by toxic effects 
which decrease the viability of the host and lead to low yield of the product.
During the expression of the esterase autotransporter AT877 from Psychrobacter
cryohalolentis K5T, we observed significant growth inhibition of the C41(DE3)
cells in comparison with the same cells producing other recombinant proteins.
Induction of AT877 synthesis also resulted in the elevated expression of a
magnesium transporter MgtA and decreased ATP content of the cells. To
characterize the response to overexpression of the autotransporter in bacterial
cells, we performed a comparative analysis of their proteomic profile by mass
spectrometry. According to the obtained data, E. coli cells which synthesize
AT877 experience complex stress condition presumably associated with secretion
apparatus overloading and improper localization of the recombinant protein.
Several response pathways were shown to be activated by AT877 overproduction
including Cpx, PhoP/PhoQ, Psp, and σE The obtained results open new opportunities
for optimization of the recombinant membrane protein expression in E. coli for
structural studies and biotechnological applications.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5 
PMID: 34351586 


5. Environ Pollut. 2021 Jul 17;288:117804. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Multiple sequence types, virulence determinants and antimicrobial resistance
genes in multidrug- and colistin-resistant Escherichia coli from agricultural and
non-agricultural soils.

Furlan JPR(1), Stehling EG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: elianags@usp.br.

In soils, the presence of clinically relevant bacteria carrying ARGs, including
extended-spectrum β-lactamase- and plasmid-mediated AmpC β-lactamase-encoding
genes, is an underestimated public health problem that requires more attention.
For this investigation, 300 samples from agricultural and non-agricultural soils 
were used to obtain 41 MDR E. coli isolates, standing out the resistance to
β-lactams, fluoroquinolones and colistin. Virulence genes related to
diarrheagenic E. coli and extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli were detected.
Several ARGs were found, highlighting the presence of at least one
β-lactamase-encoding gene (blaTEM, blaCMY, blaSHV, blaOXA-1-like, blaCTX-M-2,
and/or blaCTX-M-15) in each isolate. Among the fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli 
isolates, the plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance genes (qnrB and oqxA) and
substitutions in the quinolone resistance-determining regions were detected. Some
isolates were resistant to colistin (MICs of 4-8 mg/L) and, although no mcr-like 
gene was detected, substitutions in the two-component systems involving PhoP/PhoQ
and PmrA/PmrB were found. Furthermore, the E. coli isolates presented plasmids
and class 1 integrons, the last one detected in all isolates. The ARGs blaTEM,
aadA and dfrA and the lpfA virulence-associated gene presented statistically
significant differences (P < 0.05) in agricultural soils, while the blaOXA-1-like
gene presented a statistically significant difference in non-agricultural soils. 
Thirty-eight sequence types (STs) were identified among the isolates,
spotlighting the 20 different STs that carried blaCMY and blaCTX-M-type genes and
those commonly reported in infections worldwide. The occurrence of virulent,
multidrug- and colistin-resistant E. coli isolates in soils could lead to
contamination of surrounding environments and food, increasing the risk of human 
and animal exposure. Therefore, this study contributes to a better understanding 
of E. coli in soils and reinforces the importance of the One Health approach to
antimicrobial resistance surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804 
PMID: 34329068 


6. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Jul 12;14:2657-2666. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S314490.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Mechanism of Polymyxin Resistance in Multidrug-Resistant Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Escherichia coli Isolates from Henan Province, China: A
Multicenter Study.

Yan W(#)(1), Zhang Q(#)(1), Zhu Y(1), Jing N(1), Yuan Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Ren S(3),
Hu D(4), Zhao W(5), Zhang X(6), Shi C(7), Wang M(8), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Henan Provincial People's Hospital,
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, People's Hospital of Henan University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhengzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng People's Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhumadian First People's Hospital,
Zhumadian, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng Central Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Gongyi People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Microbiology Laboratory, KingMed Diagnostics, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Medical Imaging, Henan Provincial People's Hospital & the
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Purpose: To evaluate polymyxin-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia
coli prevalence and characteristics in the Henan province, China.
Materials and Methods: A total of 2301 bacterial isolates collected at six
hospitals were assessed. Their response to polymyxin was evaluated by minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) analysis, and the mobilized colistin resistance
(mcr) and carbapenemase gene were explored. Mutations on mgrB, phoPQ, pmrAB, and 
crrAB in polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae were detected by PCR. phoP, phoQ,
pmrK, pmrA, pmrB, and pmrC transcriptional levels were quantified by RT-qPCR.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multi-locus sequence typing were
performed to determine the phylogenetic relationship between the
polymyxin-resistant isolates.
Results: Of the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates identified, 0.3% and 1.4% were
polymyxin-resistant, respectively, with MICs of 4-64 μg/mL. All
polymyxin-resistant isolates were susceptible to tigecycline. Four E. coli
isolates were mcr-1-positive and one was carbapenem-resistant, carrying bla NDM-5
and mcr-1. One K. pneumoniae isolate was mcr-1-positive and nine were
carbapenem-resistant (PRCRKP), carrying bla KPC-2 but not mcr-1. The five E. coli
isolates belonged to four sequence types (ST2, ST132, ST632, and ST983). All
PRCRKP isolates belonged to ST11. However, all 16 isolates belonged to different 
PFGE types with <95% genetic similarity. Insertion sequences in mgrB were
detected in nine (81.8%) polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae samples. Colistin
resistance was linked with pmrHFIJKLM operon upregulation, with phoP, phoQ, and
pmrK being overexpressed in all but one of the polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae 
samples. Furthermore, 33.3% of patients carrying polymyxin-resistant isolates had
previously used polymyxin, and 66.7% patients displayed good clinical outcomes.
Conclusion: The K. pneumoniae polymyxin resistance rate was slightly higher than 
that of E. coli and mcr-1 was more common in E. coli than in K. pneumoniae.
Moreover, the insertion of ISkpn14 into mgrB may be the main contributor to
polymyxin-resistance in K. pneumoniae in Henan.

© 2021 Yan et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S314490 
PMCID: PMC8285567
PMID: 34285518 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


7. Front Microbiol. 2021 Apr 26;12:666782. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.666782.
eCollection 2021.

Impact of mcr-1 on the Development of High Level Colistin Resistance in
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli.

Zhu XQ(1)(2), Liu YY(1)(2), Wu R(1)(2), Xun H(1)(2), Sun J(1)(2), Li J(3), Feng
Y(2)(4), Liu JH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development and Safety Evaluation, Key Laboratory of
Zoonosis of Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs, National Risk Assessment 
Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Microorganisms in Animals, South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Diseases,
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.

Plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1 generally confers low-level
resistance. The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of mcr-1 on
the development of high-level colistin resistance (HLCR) in Klebsiella pneumoniae
and Escherichia coli. In this study, mcr-1-negative K. pneumoniae and E. coli
strains and their corresponding mcr-1-positive transformants were used to
generate HLCR mutants via multiple passages in the presence of increasing
concentrations of colistin. We found that for K. pneumoniae, HLCR mutants with
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of colistin from 64 to 1,024 mg/L were
generated. Colistin MICs increased 256- to 4,096-fold for mcr-1-negative K.
pneumoniae strains but only 16- to 256-fold for the mcr-1-harboring
transformants. For E. coli, colistin MICs increased 4- to 64-folds, but only 2-
to 16-fold for their mcr-1-harboring transformants. Notably, mcr-1 improved the
survival rates of both E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains when challenged with
relatively high concentrations of colistin. In HLCR K. pneumoniae mutants, amino 
acid alterations predominately occurred in crrB, followed by phoQ, crrA, pmrB,
mgrB, and phoP, while in E. coli mutants, genetic alterations were mostly
occurred in pmrB and phoQ. Additionally, growth rate analyses showed that the
coexistence of mcr-1 and chromosomal mutations imposed a fitness burden on HLCR
mutants of K. pneumoniae. In conclusion, HLCR was more likely to occur in K.
pneumoniae strains than E. coli strains when exposed to colistin. The mcr-1 gene 
could improve the survival rates of strains of both bacterial species but could
not facilitate the evolution of high-level colistin resistance.

Copyright © 2021 Zhu, Liu, Wu, Xun, Sun, Li, Feng and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.666782 
PMCID: PMC8108134
PMID: 33981294 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


8. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2021 Apr 27;20(1):32. doi:
10.1186/s12941-021-00437-8.

Molecular characteristics of antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
pneumoniae strains isolated from hospitalized patients in Tehran, Iran.

Sharahi JY(1), Hashemi A(2), Ardebili A(3)(4), Davoudabadi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. ali.hashemi@sbmu.ac.ir.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences,
Gorgan, Iran.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Golestan University of
Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the distribution of carbapenem and colistin resistance
mechanisms of clinical E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates from Iran.
METHODS: 165 non-duplicate non-consecutive isolates of K. pneumoniae and E. coli 
were collected from hospitalized patients admitted to Iran's tertiary care
hospitals from September 2016 to August 2018. The isolates were cultured from
different clinical specimens, including wound, urine, blood, and tracheal
aspirates. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by disc diffusion and 
microdilution method according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
(CLSI) guideline. The presence of extended spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) genes,
carbapenemase genes, as well as fosfomycin resistance genes, and colistin
resistance genes was also examined by PCR-sequencing. The ability of biofilm
formation was assessed with crystal violet staining method. The expression of
colistin resistance genes were measured by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
(RT-qPCR) analysis to evaluate the association between gene upregulation and
colistin resistance. Genotyping was performed using the multi-locus sequencing
typing (MLST).
RESULTS: Colistin and tigecycline were the most effective antimicrobial agents
with 90.3% and 82.4% susceptibility. Notably, 16 (9.7%) isolates showed
resistance to colistin. Overall, 33 (20%), 31 (18.8%), and 95 (57.6%) isolates
were categorized as strong, moderate, and weak biofilm-producer, respectively.
Additionally, blaTEM, blaSHV, blaCTX-M, blaNDM-1, blaOXA-48-like and blaNDM-6
resistance genes were detected in 98 (59.4%), 54 (32.7%), 77 (46.7%), 3 (1.8%),
17 (10.30%) and 3 (1.8%) isolates, respectively. Inactivation of mgrB gene due to
nonsense mutations and insertion of IS elements was observed in 6 colistin
resistant isolates. Colistin resistance was found to be linked to upregulation of
pmrA-C, pmrK, phoP, and phoQ genes. Three of blaNDM-1 and 3 of blaNDM-6 variants 
were found to be carried by IncL/M and IncF plasmid, respectively. MLST revealed 
that blaNDM positive isolates were clonally related and belonged to three
distinct clonal complexes, including ST147, ST15 and ST3299.
CONCLUSIONS: The large-scale surveillance and effective infection control
measures are also urgently needed to prevent the outbreak of diverse carbapenem- 
and colistin-resistant isolates in the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-021-00437-8 
PMCID: PMC8077724
PMID: 33906654 


9. Microb Drug Resist. 2021 Sep;27(9):1249-1258. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0479. Epub
2021 Feb 10.

Colistin Resistance Mechanisms in Clinical Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp.
Isolates from the Western Cape of South Africa.

Snyman Y(1), Whitelaw AC(1)(2), Reuter S(3), Maloba MRB(4)(5), Newton-Foot
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Pathology, Stellenbosch
University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)National Health Laboratory Service, Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(3)Institute for Infection Prevention and Hospital Epidemiology, Medical Center
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of the Free State,
Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(5)National Health Laboratory Service, Universitas Hospital, Bloemfontein, South 
Africa.

Objectives: Colistin is a last-resort antibiotic for the treatment of
carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative infections. Colistin resistance thus poses a
threat to human health. Colistin resistance is most commonly encoded by mutations
in chromosomal pmrA, pmrB, phoP, phoQ, ccrB, and mgrB genes, and the presence of 
plasmid-mediated mcr genes. This study describes colistin resistance mechanisms
in clinical Enterobacterales isolates from the Western Cape, South Africa.
Results: Escherichia coli (n = 22) and Klebsiella spp. (n = 7) isolates, from
nine health care facilities, were confirmed to be colistin resistant during 2016 
and 2017. mcr-1 was present in 55% (12/22) of E. coli and 71% (5/7) of Klebsiella
spp. isolates. Colistin resistance mutations in pmrB were identified in 8/10
mcr-negative E. coli isolates using whole-genome sequencing, with pmrB Pro-94→Gln
being the most frequent with presence in 4 isolates. One mcr-negative Klebsiella 
spp. isolate had a complete deletion of the mgrB and one contained an insertion
sequence (IS1) in mgrB. Conclusion: A reduction in the proportion of
colistin-resistant isolates harboring mcr-1 from 2016 to 2017 was observed.
Colistin-resistant E. coli attributed by chromosomal mutations in pmrB in 2017
were mostly clonal related, which contrasts with the 2016 unrelated
mcr-1-positive isolates. The diverse strains, hospitals, and resistance
mechanisms may suggest that selective pressure is the main driver of colistin
resistance.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0479 
PMID: 33571049 


10. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Jan 4;17(1):e1008130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008130.
eCollection 2021 Jan.

Overlaid positive and negative feedback loops shape dynamical properties of PhoPQ
two-component system.

Rao SD(1), Igoshin OA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Departments of Biosciences and Chemistry, Center for Theoretical Biological
Physics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.

Bacteria use two-component systems (TCSs) to sense environmental conditions and
change gene expression in response to those conditions. To amplify cellular
responses, many bacterial TCSs are under positive feedback control, i.e. increase
their expression when activated. Escherichia coli Mg2+ -sensing TCS, PhoPQ, in
addition to the positive feedback, includes a negative feedback loop via the
upregulation of the MgrB protein that inhibits PhoQ. How the interplay of these
feedback loops shapes steady-state and dynamical responses of PhoPQ TCS to change
in Mg2+ remains poorly understood. In particular, how the presence of MgrB
feedback affects the robustness of PhoPQ response to overexpression of TCS is
unclear. It is also unclear why the steady-state response to decreasing Mg2+ is
biphasic, i.e. plateaus over a range of Mg2+ concentrations, and then increases
again at growth-limiting Mg2+. In this study, we use mathematical modeling to
identify potential mechanisms behind these experimentally observed dynamical
properties. The results make experimentally testable predictions for the regime
with response robustness and propose a novel explanation of biphasic response
constraining the mechanisms for modulation of PhoQ activity by Mg2+ and MgrB.
Finally, we show how the interplay of positive and negative feedback loops
affects the network's steady-state sensitivity and response dynamics. In the
absence of MgrB feedback, the model predicts oscillations thereby suggesting a
general mechanism of oscillatory or pulsatile dynamics in autoregulated TCSs.
These results improve the understanding of TCS signaling and other networks with 
overlaid positive and negative feedback.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008130 
PMCID: PMC7808668
PMID: 33395414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


############# ((phoQ) AND (phoQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Basic Microbiol. 2021 Sep 12. doi: 10.1002/jobm.202100355. [Epub ahead of
print]

Subinhibitory concentration stress of colistin enhanced PhoPQ expression in
Escherichia coli harboring mcr-1.

Elizabeth R(1), Wangkheimayum J(1), Singha KM(2), Chanda DD(2), Bhattacharjee
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Assam University, Silchar, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar,
Assam, India.

The increased and inappropriate use of colistin led to the emergence of its
resistance among Gram-negative bacterial isolates and the most common mechanism
of colistin resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is the modification of the
lipopolysaccharide mediated by two-component regulatory systems, PhoPQ and PmrAB.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the transcriptional expression of
the PhoPQ system against colistin stress in clinical isolates of Escherichia coli
with colistin-resistant phenotype. Six colistin-resistant E. coli isolates were
obtained from Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar that were of clinical
origin and received for routine culture and sensitivity testing. Screening for
colistin resistance was done by broth microdilution method and further screened
for the presence of the different types of plasmid-mediated colistin resistance
mcr genes namely, mcr-1 to mcr-10 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
screened positive isolates were subjected to PCR assay targeting phoP and phoQ
genes and their expression was measured by quantitative real-time PCR. The
results of this study revealed that two E. coli isolates (TS2 and TS4) were found
to carry the mcr-1 gene. PhoP and PhoQ gene amplification was observed in all the
isolates. Transcriptional analysis showed that the isolates harboring the mcr-1
gene showed an enhanced level of expression in the PhoP, PhoQ genes in the
presence of a subinhibitory concentration of colistin whereas no significant
expression was observed for the isolates which were devoid of the mcr gene. This 
study demonstrates the involvement of mcr-1 in the PhoPQ system in clinical
isolates of colistin-resistant E. coli which will help in designing a molecular
marker for detecting colistin-resistant E. coli and contribute to the assessment 
of resistance burden and infection control strategy.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.202100355 
PMID: 34510495 


2. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Aug 10;14:3041-3051. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S324303.
eCollection 2021.

Acquisition of the mcr-1 Gene Lowers the Target Mutation to Impede the Evolution 
of a High-Level Colistin-Resistant Mutant in Escherichia coli.

Huang C(1)(2), Shi Q(2), Zhang S(2), Wu H(1), Xiao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ningbo Medical Center Lihuili Hospital,
Ningbo, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Objective: The spread of the plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1
poses a significant public health threat. Little information is available on the 
development of high-level colistin-resistant mutants (HLCRMs) in MCR-1-producing 
Escherichia coli (MCRPEC). The present study was designed to evaluate the impact 
of chromosomal modifications in pmrAB, phoPQ, and mgrB combined with mcr-1 on
colistin resistance in E. coli.
Methods: Five MCRPEC and three non-MCRPEC (E. coli ATCC25922 and two
plasmid-curing) strains were used. The HLCRMs were selected through
multi-stepwise colistin exposure. Moreover, two E. coli C600-pMCRs were
constructed and used for selection of HLCRMs. Further analysis included mutation 
rates and DNA sequencing. Transcripts of pmrABC, phoP, mgrB, and mcr-1 were
quantified by real-time quantitative PCR.
Results: All tested HLCRMs were successfully isolated from their parental
strains. Non-MCRPEC strains had higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs)
and mutation rates than MCRPEC strains. Nineteen amino acid substitutions were
identified: seven in PmrA, six in PmrB, one in PhoP, three in PhoQ, and two in
MgrB. Most were detected in non-MCRPEC strains. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant 
predicted that four substitutions, PmrA Gly15Arg, Gly53Arg, PmrB Pro94Gln, and
PhoP Asp86Gly, affected protein function. Two HLCRM isolates did not show amino
acid substitutions in contrast to their parental MCRPEC isolates. No further
mutations were detected in the second- and third-step mutants. Further
transcriptional analysis showed that the up-regulation of pmrCAB expression was
greater in the mutant of E. coli C600 than in E. coli C600-pMCR.
Conclusion: Acquisition of the mcr-1 gene had a negative impact on the
development of HLCRMs in E. coli, but was associated with low-level colistin
resistance. Thus, colistin-based combination regimens may be effective against
infections with MCR-1-producing isolates.

© 2021 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S324303 
PMCID: PMC8364431
PMID: 34408448 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


3. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jul 28;12:682205. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205.
eCollection 2021.

MgrB Inactivation Confers Trimethoprim Resistance in Escherichia coli.

Shi H(1)(2), Li T(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Yang S(1)(2), Zhang XE(3), Tao
S(4), Gu J(1), Deng JY(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of TB Systems Biology and Translational
Medicine, Foshan, China.

After several decades of use, trimethoprim (TMP) remains one of the key access
antimicrobial drugs listed by the World Health Organization. To circumvent the
problem of trimethoprim resistance worldwide, a better understanding of
drug-resistance mechanisms is required. In this study, we screened the
single-gene knockout library of Escherichia coli, and identified mgrB and other
several genes involved in trimethoprim resistance. Subsequent comparative
transcriptional analysis between ΔmgrB and the wild-type strain showed that
expression levels of phoP, phoQ, and folA were significantly upregulated in
ΔmgrB. Further deleting phoP or phoQ could partially restore trimethoprim
sensitivity to ΔmgrB, and co-overexpression of phoP/Q caused TMP resistance,
suggesting the involvement of PhoP/Q in trimethoprim resistance. Correspondingly,
MgrB and PhoP were shown to be able to modulated folA expression in vivo. After
that, efforts were made to test if PhoP could directly modulate the expression of
folA. Though phosphorylated PhoP could bind to the promotor region of folA in
vitro, the former only provided a weak protection on the latter as shown by the
DNA footprinting assay. In addition, deleting the deduced PhoP box in ΔmgrB could
only slightly reverse the TMP resistance phenotype, suggesting that it is less
likely for PhoP to directly modulate the transcription of folA. Taken together,
our data suggested that, in E. coli, MgrB affects susceptibility to trimethoprim 
by modulating the expression of folA with the involvement of PhoP/Q. This work
broadens our understanding of the regulation of folate metabolism and the
mechanisms of TMP resistance in bacteria.

Copyright © 2021 Shi, Li, Xu, Yu, Yang, Zhang, Tao, Gu and Deng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205 
PMCID: PMC8355897
PMID: 34394028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


4. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Aug 5. doi: 10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5. [Epub ahead
of print]

Increased Synthesis of a Magnesium Transporter MgtA During Recombinant
Autotransporter Expression in Escherichia coli.

Petrovskaya LE(1), Ziganshin RH(2), Kryukova EA(2)(3), Zlobinov AV(2), Gapizov
SS(2)(3)(4), Shingarova LN(2), Mironov VA(5), Lomakina GY(6)(7), Dolgikh
DA(2)(3)(4), Kirpichnikov MP(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
lpetr65@yahoo.com.
(2)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
(3)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Kosygina str., 4, Moscow, 119334,
Russia.
(4)Department of Biology, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
gory, 1, Moscow, 119234, Russia.
(5)Roche Diagnostics Rus LLC, Letnikovskaya str. 2/2, Moscow, 115114, Russia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1/3, Moscow, 119991, Russia.
(7)Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Baumanskaya 2-ya, 5/1, Moscow,
105005, Russia.

Overproduction of the membrane proteins in Escherichia coli cells is a common
approach to obtain sufficient material for their functional and structural
studies. However, the efficiency of this process can be limited by toxic effects 
which decrease the viability of the host and lead to low yield of the product.
During the expression of the esterase autotransporter AT877 from Psychrobacter
cryohalolentis K5T, we observed significant growth inhibition of the C41(DE3)
cells in comparison with the same cells producing other recombinant proteins.
Induction of AT877 synthesis also resulted in the elevated expression of a
magnesium transporter MgtA and decreased ATP content of the cells. To
characterize the response to overexpression of the autotransporter in bacterial
cells, we performed a comparative analysis of their proteomic profile by mass
spectrometry. According to the obtained data, E. coli cells which synthesize
AT877 experience complex stress condition presumably associated with secretion
apparatus overloading and improper localization of the recombinant protein.
Several response pathways were shown to be activated by AT877 overproduction
including Cpx, PhoP/PhoQ, Psp, and σE The obtained results open new opportunities
for optimization of the recombinant membrane protein expression in E. coli for
structural studies and biotechnological applications.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5 
PMID: 34351586 


5. Environ Pollut. 2021 Jul 17;288:117804. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Multiple sequence types, virulence determinants and antimicrobial resistance
genes in multidrug- and colistin-resistant Escherichia coli from agricultural and
non-agricultural soils.

Furlan JPR(1), Stehling EG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: elianags@usp.br.

In soils, the presence of clinically relevant bacteria carrying ARGs, including
extended-spectrum β-lactamase- and plasmid-mediated AmpC β-lactamase-encoding
genes, is an underestimated public health problem that requires more attention.
For this investigation, 300 samples from agricultural and non-agricultural soils 
were used to obtain 41 MDR E. coli isolates, standing out the resistance to
β-lactams, fluoroquinolones and colistin. Virulence genes related to
diarrheagenic E. coli and extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli were detected.
Several ARGs were found, highlighting the presence of at least one
β-lactamase-encoding gene (blaTEM, blaCMY, blaSHV, blaOXA-1-like, blaCTX-M-2,
and/or blaCTX-M-15) in each isolate. Among the fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli 
isolates, the plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance genes (qnrB and oqxA) and
substitutions in the quinolone resistance-determining regions were detected. Some
isolates were resistant to colistin (MICs of 4-8 mg/L) and, although no mcr-like 
gene was detected, substitutions in the two-component systems involving PhoP/PhoQ
and PmrA/PmrB were found. Furthermore, the E. coli isolates presented plasmids
and class 1 integrons, the last one detected in all isolates. The ARGs blaTEM,
aadA and dfrA and the lpfA virulence-associated gene presented statistically
significant differences (P < 0.05) in agricultural soils, while the blaOXA-1-like
gene presented a statistically significant difference in non-agricultural soils. 
Thirty-eight sequence types (STs) were identified among the isolates,
spotlighting the 20 different STs that carried blaCMY and blaCTX-M-type genes and
those commonly reported in infections worldwide. The occurrence of virulent,
multidrug- and colistin-resistant E. coli isolates in soils could lead to
contamination of surrounding environments and food, increasing the risk of human 
and animal exposure. Therefore, this study contributes to a better understanding 
of E. coli in soils and reinforces the importance of the One Health approach to
antimicrobial resistance surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804 
PMID: 34329068 


6. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Jul 12;14:2657-2666. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S314490.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Mechanism of Polymyxin Resistance in Multidrug-Resistant Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Escherichia coli Isolates from Henan Province, China: A
Multicenter Study.

Yan W(#)(1), Zhang Q(#)(1), Zhu Y(1), Jing N(1), Yuan Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Ren S(3),
Hu D(4), Zhao W(5), Zhang X(6), Shi C(7), Wang M(8), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Henan Provincial People's Hospital,
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, People's Hospital of Henan University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhengzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng People's Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhumadian First People's Hospital,
Zhumadian, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng Central Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Gongyi People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Microbiology Laboratory, KingMed Diagnostics, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Medical Imaging, Henan Provincial People's Hospital & the
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Purpose: To evaluate polymyxin-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia
coli prevalence and characteristics in the Henan province, China.
Materials and Methods: A total of 2301 bacterial isolates collected at six
hospitals were assessed. Their response to polymyxin was evaluated by minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) analysis, and the mobilized colistin resistance
(mcr) and carbapenemase gene were explored. Mutations on mgrB, phoPQ, pmrAB, and 
crrAB in polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae were detected by PCR. phoP, phoQ,
pmrK, pmrA, pmrB, and pmrC transcriptional levels were quantified by RT-qPCR.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multi-locus sequence typing were
performed to determine the phylogenetic relationship between the
polymyxin-resistant isolates.
Results: Of the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates identified, 0.3% and 1.4% were
polymyxin-resistant, respectively, with MICs of 4-64 μg/mL. All
polymyxin-resistant isolates were susceptible to tigecycline. Four E. coli
isolates were mcr-1-positive and one was carbapenem-resistant, carrying bla NDM-5
and mcr-1. One K. pneumoniae isolate was mcr-1-positive and nine were
carbapenem-resistant (PRCRKP), carrying bla KPC-2 but not mcr-1. The five E. coli
isolates belonged to four sequence types (ST2, ST132, ST632, and ST983). All
PRCRKP isolates belonged to ST11. However, all 16 isolates belonged to different 
PFGE types with <95% genetic similarity. Insertion sequences in mgrB were
detected in nine (81.8%) polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae samples. Colistin
resistance was linked with pmrHFIJKLM operon upregulation, with phoP, phoQ, and
pmrK being overexpressed in all but one of the polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae 
samples. Furthermore, 33.3% of patients carrying polymyxin-resistant isolates had
previously used polymyxin, and 66.7% patients displayed good clinical outcomes.
Conclusion: The K. pneumoniae polymyxin resistance rate was slightly higher than 
that of E. coli and mcr-1 was more common in E. coli than in K. pneumoniae.
Moreover, the insertion of ISkpn14 into mgrB may be the main contributor to
polymyxin-resistance in K. pneumoniae in Henan.

© 2021 Yan et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S314490 
PMCID: PMC8285567
PMID: 34285518 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


7. Front Microbiol. 2021 Apr 26;12:666782. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.666782.
eCollection 2021.

Impact of mcr-1 on the Development of High Level Colistin Resistance in
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli.

Zhu XQ(1)(2), Liu YY(1)(2), Wu R(1)(2), Xun H(1)(2), Sun J(1)(2), Li J(3), Feng
Y(2)(4), Liu JH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development and Safety Evaluation, Key Laboratory of
Zoonosis of Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs, National Risk Assessment 
Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Microorganisms in Animals, South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Diseases,
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.

Plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1 generally confers low-level
resistance. The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of mcr-1 on
the development of high-level colistin resistance (HLCR) in Klebsiella pneumoniae
and Escherichia coli. In this study, mcr-1-negative K. pneumoniae and E. coli
strains and their corresponding mcr-1-positive transformants were used to
generate HLCR mutants via multiple passages in the presence of increasing
concentrations of colistin. We found that for K. pneumoniae, HLCR mutants with
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of colistin from 64 to 1,024 mg/L were
generated. Colistin MICs increased 256- to 4,096-fold for mcr-1-negative K.
pneumoniae strains but only 16- to 256-fold for the mcr-1-harboring
transformants. For E. coli, colistin MICs increased 4- to 64-folds, but only 2-
to 16-fold for their mcr-1-harboring transformants. Notably, mcr-1 improved the
survival rates of both E. coli and K. pneumoniae strains when challenged with
relatively high concentrations of colistin. In HLCR K. pneumoniae mutants, amino 
acid alterations predominately occurred in crrB, followed by phoQ, crrA, pmrB,
mgrB, and phoP, while in E. coli mutants, genetic alterations were mostly
occurred in pmrB and phoQ. Additionally, growth rate analyses showed that the
coexistence of mcr-1 and chromosomal mutations imposed a fitness burden on HLCR
mutants of K. pneumoniae. In conclusion, HLCR was more likely to occur in K.
pneumoniae strains than E. coli strains when exposed to colistin. The mcr-1 gene 
could improve the survival rates of strains of both bacterial species but could
not facilitate the evolution of high-level colistin resistance.

Copyright © 2021 Zhu, Liu, Wu, Xun, Sun, Li, Feng and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.666782 
PMCID: PMC8108134
PMID: 33981294 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


8. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2021 Apr 27;20(1):32. doi:
10.1186/s12941-021-00437-8.

Molecular characteristics of antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
pneumoniae strains isolated from hospitalized patients in Tehran, Iran.

Sharahi JY(1), Hashemi A(2), Ardebili A(3)(4), Davoudabadi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. ali.hashemi@sbmu.ac.ir.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences,
Gorgan, Iran.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Golestan University of
Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the distribution of carbapenem and colistin resistance
mechanisms of clinical E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates from Iran.
METHODS: 165 non-duplicate non-consecutive isolates of K. pneumoniae and E. coli 
were collected from hospitalized patients admitted to Iran's tertiary care
hospitals from September 2016 to August 2018. The isolates were cultured from
different clinical specimens, including wound, urine, blood, and tracheal
aspirates. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by disc diffusion and 
microdilution method according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
(CLSI) guideline. The presence of extended spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) genes,
carbapenemase genes, as well as fosfomycin resistance genes, and colistin
resistance genes was also examined by PCR-sequencing. The ability of biofilm
formation was assessed with crystal violet staining method. The expression of
colistin resistance genes were measured by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
(RT-qPCR) analysis to evaluate the association between gene upregulation and
colistin resistance. Genotyping was performed using the multi-locus sequencing
typing (MLST).
RESULTS: Colistin and tigecycline were the most effective antimicrobial agents
with 90.3% and 82.4% susceptibility. Notably, 16 (9.7%) isolates showed
resistance to colistin. Overall, 33 (20%), 31 (18.8%), and 95 (57.6%) isolates
were categorized as strong, moderate, and weak biofilm-producer, respectively.
Additionally, blaTEM, blaSHV, blaCTX-M, blaNDM-1, blaOXA-48-like and blaNDM-6
resistance genes were detected in 98 (59.4%), 54 (32.7%), 77 (46.7%), 3 (1.8%),
17 (10.30%) and 3 (1.8%) isolates, respectively. Inactivation of mgrB gene due to
nonsense mutations and insertion of IS elements was observed in 6 colistin
resistant isolates. Colistin resistance was found to be linked to upregulation of
pmrA-C, pmrK, phoP, and phoQ genes. Three of blaNDM-1 and 3 of blaNDM-6 variants 
were found to be carried by IncL/M and IncF plasmid, respectively. MLST revealed 
that blaNDM positive isolates were clonally related and belonged to three
distinct clonal complexes, including ST147, ST15 and ST3299.
CONCLUSIONS: The large-scale surveillance and effective infection control
measures are also urgently needed to prevent the outbreak of diverse carbapenem- 
and colistin-resistant isolates in the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-021-00437-8 
PMCID: PMC8077724
PMID: 33906654 


9. Microb Drug Resist. 2021 Sep;27(9):1249-1258. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0479. Epub
2021 Feb 10.

Colistin Resistance Mechanisms in Clinical Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp.
Isolates from the Western Cape of South Africa.

Snyman Y(1), Whitelaw AC(1)(2), Reuter S(3), Maloba MRB(4)(5), Newton-Foot
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Pathology, Stellenbosch
University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)National Health Laboratory Service, Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(3)Institute for Infection Prevention and Hospital Epidemiology, Medical Center
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of the Free State,
Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(5)National Health Laboratory Service, Universitas Hospital, Bloemfontein, South 
Africa.

Objectives: Colistin is a last-resort antibiotic for the treatment of
carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative infections. Colistin resistance thus poses a
threat to human health. Colistin resistance is most commonly encoded by mutations
in chromosomal pmrA, pmrB, phoP, phoQ, ccrB, and mgrB genes, and the presence of 
plasmid-mediated mcr genes. This study describes colistin resistance mechanisms
in clinical Enterobacterales isolates from the Western Cape, South Africa.
Results: Escherichia coli (n = 22) and Klebsiella spp. (n = 7) isolates, from
nine health care facilities, were confirmed to be colistin resistant during 2016 
and 2017. mcr-1 was present in 55% (12/22) of E. coli and 71% (5/7) of Klebsiella
spp. isolates. Colistin resistance mutations in pmrB were identified in 8/10
mcr-negative E. coli isolates using whole-genome sequencing, with pmrB Pro-94→Gln
being the most frequent with presence in 4 isolates. One mcr-negative Klebsiella 
spp. isolate had a complete deletion of the mgrB and one contained an insertion
sequence (IS1) in mgrB. Conclusion: A reduction in the proportion of
colistin-resistant isolates harboring mcr-1 from 2016 to 2017 was observed.
Colistin-resistant E. coli attributed by chromosomal mutations in pmrB in 2017
were mostly clonal related, which contrasts with the 2016 unrelated
mcr-1-positive isolates. The diverse strains, hospitals, and resistance
mechanisms may suggest that selective pressure is the main driver of colistin
resistance.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0479 
PMID: 33571049 


10. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Jan 4;17(1):e1008130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008130.
eCollection 2021 Jan.

Overlaid positive and negative feedback loops shape dynamical properties of PhoPQ
two-component system.

Rao SD(1), Igoshin OA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Departments of Biosciences and Chemistry, Center for Theoretical Biological
Physics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.

Bacteria use two-component systems (TCSs) to sense environmental conditions and
change gene expression in response to those conditions. To amplify cellular
responses, many bacterial TCSs are under positive feedback control, i.e. increase
their expression when activated. Escherichia coli Mg2+ -sensing TCS, PhoPQ, in
addition to the positive feedback, includes a negative feedback loop via the
upregulation of the MgrB protein that inhibits PhoQ. How the interplay of these
feedback loops shapes steady-state and dynamical responses of PhoPQ TCS to change
in Mg2+ remains poorly understood. In particular, how the presence of MgrB
feedback affects the robustness of PhoPQ response to overexpression of TCS is
unclear. It is also unclear why the steady-state response to decreasing Mg2+ is
biphasic, i.e. plateaus over a range of Mg2+ concentrations, and then increases
again at growth-limiting Mg2+. In this study, we use mathematical modeling to
identify potential mechanisms behind these experimentally observed dynamical
properties. The results make experimentally testable predictions for the regime
with response robustness and propose a novel explanation of biphasic response
constraining the mechanisms for modulation of PhoQ activity by Mg2+ and MgrB.
Finally, we show how the interplay of positive and negative feedback loops
affects the network's steady-state sensitivity and response dynamics. In the
absence of MgrB feedback, the model predicts oscillations thereby suggesting a
general mechanism of oscillatory or pulsatile dynamics in autoregulated TCSs.
These results improve the understanding of TCS signaling and other networks with 
overlaid positive and negative feedback.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008130 
PMCID: PMC7808668
PMID: 33395414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


############# ((ppsR) AND (ppsR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nat Commun. 2017 Nov 22;8(1):1705. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01835-3.

The genetic basis for the adaptation of E. coli to sugar synthesis from CO2.

Herz E(1), Antonovsky N(1), Bar-On Y(1), Davidi D(1), Gleizer S(1), Prywes N(1), 
Noda-Garcia L(2), Lyn Frisch K(1), Zohar Y(1), Wernick DG(1), Savidor A(3),
Barenholz U(1), Milo R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, 7610001, Israel.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
7610001, Israel.
(3)de Botton Institute for Protein Profiling, The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel 
National Center for Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, 7610001, Israel.
(4)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, 7610001, Israel. ron.milo@weizmann.ac.il.

Understanding the evolution of a new metabolic capability in full mechanistic
detail is challenging, as causative mutations may be masked by non-essential
"hitchhiking" mutations accumulated during the evolutionary trajectory. We have
previously used adaptive laboratory evolution of a rationally engineered
ancestor to generate an Escherichia coli strain able to utilize CO2 fixation for 
sugar synthesis. Here, we reveal the genetic basis underlying this metabolic
transition. Five mutations are sufficient to enable robust growth when a
non-native Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle provides all the sugar-derived metabolic
building blocks. These mutations are found either in enzymes that affect the
efflux of intermediates from the autocatalytic CO2 fixation cycle toward biomass 
(prs, serA, and pgi), or in key regulators of carbon metabolism (crp and ppsR).
Using suppressor analysis, we show that a decrease in catalytic capacity is a
common feature of all mutations found in enzymes. These findings highlight the
enzymatic constraints that are essential to the metabolic stability of
autocatalytic cycles and are relevant to future efforts in constructing
non-native carbon fixation pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01835-3 
PMCID: PMC5700066
PMID: 29167457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Feb 27;11(2):e1004103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004103. 
eCollection 2015 Feb.

An integrated approach to reconstructing genome-scale transcriptional regulatory 
networks.

Imam S(1), Noguera DR(2), Donohue TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department of Bacteriology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America;
Wisconsin Energy Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America; Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs) program cells to dynamically alter
their gene expression in response to changing internal or environmental
conditions. In this study, we develop a novel workflow for generating large-scale
TRN models that integrates comparative genomics data, global gene expression
analyses, and intrinsic properties of transcription factors (TFs). An assessment 
of this workflow using benchmark datasets for the well-studied γ-proteobacterium 
Escherichia coli showed that it outperforms expression-based inference
approaches, having a significantly larger area under the precision-recall curve. 
Further analysis indicated that this integrated workflow captures different
aspects of the E. coli TRN than expression-based approaches, potentially making
them highly complementary. We leveraged this new workflow and observations to
build a large-scale TRN model for the α-Proteobacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides
that comprises 120 gene clusters, 1211 genes (including 93 TFs), 1858 predicted
protein-DNA interactions and 76 DNA binding motifs. We found that ~67% of the
predicted gene clusters in this TRN are enriched for functions ranging from
photosynthesis or central carbon metabolism to environmental stress responses. We
also found that members of many of the predicted gene clusters were consistent
with prior knowledge in R. sphaeroides and/or other bacteria. Experimental
validation of predictions from this R. sphaeroides TRN model showed that high
precision and recall was also obtained for TFs involved in photosynthesis (PpsR),
carbon metabolism (RSP_0489) and iron homeostasis (RSP_3341). In addition, this
integrative approach enabled generation of TRNs with increased information
content relative to R. sphaeroides TRN models built via other approaches. We also
show how this approach can be used to simultaneously produce TRN models for each 
related organism used in the comparative genomics analysis. Our results highlight
the advantages of integrating comparative genomics of closely related organisms
with gene expression data to assemble large-scale TRN models with high-quality
predictions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004103 
PMCID: PMC4344238
PMID: 25723545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Photosynth Res. 2014 May;120(1-2):197-205. doi: 10.1007/s11120-013-9866-6. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Use of new strains of Rhodobacter sphaeroides and a modified simple culture
medium to increase yield and facilitate purification of the reaction centre.

Jun D(1), Saer RG, Madden JD, Beatty JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British Columbia,
2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

A new gene expression system was developed in Rhodobacter sphaeroides, replacing 
a pRK415-based system used previously. The broad host-range IPTG-inducible
plasmid pIND4 was used to create the plasmid pIND4-RC1 for expression of the puhA
and pufQBALMX genes, encoding the reaction centre (RC) and light-harvesting
complex 1 (LH1) proteins. The strain R. sphaeroides ΔRCLH was used to make a
knockout of the rshI restriction endonuclease gene, enabling electroporation of
DNA into the bacterium; a subsequent knockout of ppsR was made, creating the
strain R. sphaeroides RCx lacking this oxygen-sensing repressor of the
photosynthesis gene cluster. Using pIND4-RC1, LH1 levels were increased by a
factor of about 8 over pRS1 per cell in cultures grown semi-aerobically. In
addition, the ppsR knockout allowed for photosynthetic pigment-protein complex
synthesis in the presence of high concentrations of molecular oxygen; here, LH1
levels per cell increased by 20 % when grown under high aeration conditions. A
new medium (called RLB) is the E. coli medium LB supplemented with MgCl2 and
CaCl2, which was found to increase growth rates and final cell culture densities,
with an increase of 30 % of LH1 per cell detected in R. sphaeroides
RCx(pIND4-RC1) grown in RLB versus LB medium. Furthermore, cell density was about
three times greater in RLB compared to semi-aerobic conditions. The combination
of all the modifications resulted in an increase of LH1 and RC per mL of culture 
volume by approximately 35-fold, and a decrease in the length of culture
incubation time from about 5 days to ~36 h.

DOI: 10.1007/s11120-013-9866-6 
PMID: 23765434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 20;287(17):13850-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346494. Epub 2012
Feb 29.

PpsR, a regulator of heme and bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis, is a heme-sensing
protein.

Yin L(1), Dragnea V, Bauer CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

Heme-mediated regulation, presented in many biological processes, is achieved in 
part with proteins containing heme regulatory motif. In this study, we
demonstrate that FLAG-tagged PpsR isolated from Rhodobacter sphaeroides cells
contains bound heme. In vitro heme binding studies with tagless apo-PpsR show
that PpsR binds heme at a near one-to-one ratio with a micromolar binding
constant. Mutational and spectral assays suggest that both the second
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) and DNA binding domains of PpsR are involved in the heme
binding. Furthermore, we show that heme changes the DNA binding patterns of PpsR 
and induces different responses of photosystem genes expression. Thus, PpsR
functions as both a redox and heme sensor to coordinate the amount of heme,
bacteriochlorophyll, and photosystem apoprotein synthesis thereby providing fine 
tune control to avoid excess free tetrapyrrole accumulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346494 
PMCID: PMC3340169
PMID: 22378778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Photochem Photobiol. 2010 Jul-Aug;86(4):882-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-1097.2010.00749.x. Epub 2010 May 21.

In vivo effects on photosynthesis gene expression of base pair exchanges in the
gene encoding the light-responsive BLUF domain of AppA in Rhodobacter
sphaeroides.

Metz S(1), Hendriks J, Jäger A, Hellingwerf K, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikro- und Molekularbiologie, University of Giessen, Giessen,
Germany.

The Rhodobacter sphaeroides protein AppA has the unique quality of sensing and
transmitting light and redox signals. By acting as antirepressor to the PpsR
protein, it acts as a major regulator in photosynthesis gene expression. In this 
study, we show that by introducing amino acid exchanges into the AppA protein,
the in vivo activity as an antirepressor can be greatly altered. The tryptophan
104 to phenylalanine (W104F) base exchange greatly diminished blue-light
sensitivity of the BLUF domain. From the obtained in vivo data, the difference in
thermal recovery rate of the signaling state of the BLUF domain between the wild 
type and mutated protein was calculated, predicting an about 10-fold faster
recovery in the mutant, which is consistent with in vitro data. Introduction of a
tyrosine 21 to phenylalanine (Y21F) or to cysteine (Y21C) mutation led to a
complete loss of AppA antirepressor activity, while additionally leading to an
increase of photosynthesis gene expression after illumination with high
blue-light quantities. Interestingly, this effect is not visible in a W104F/Y21F 
double mutant that again shows a wild-type-like behavior of the BLUF domain after
blue-light illumination, thus restoring the activity of AppA.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.2010.00749.x 
PMID: 20497366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 2007 May;64(4):1090-104.

A haem cofactor is required for redox and light signalling by the AppA protein of
Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Han Y(1), Meyer MH, Keusgen M, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, University of Giessen,
D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

The AppA protein of Rhodobacter sphaeroides is unique in its ability to sense and
transmit redox signals as well as light signals. By functioning as antagonist to 
the PpsR transcriptional repressor, it regulates the expression of photosynthesis
genes in response to these environmental stimuli. Here we show binding of the
cofactor haem to a domain in the C-terminal part of AppA and redox activity of
bound haem. This is supported by the findings that: (i) the C-terminal domain of 
AppA (AppADeltaN) binds to haemin agarose, (ii) AppADeltaN isolated from
Escherichia coli shows absorbance at 411 nm and absorbances at 424 nm and 556 nm 
after reduction with dithionite and (iii) AppADeltaN can be reconstituted with
haem in vitro. Expression of AppA variants in R. sphaeroides reveals that the
haem binding domain is important for normal expression levels of photosynthesis
genes and for normal light regulation in the presence of oxygen. The haem
cofactor affects the interaction of the C-terminal part of AppA to PpsR but also 
its interaction to the N-terminal light sensing AppA-BLUF domain. Based on this
we present a model for the transmission of light and redox signals by AppA.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05724.x 
PMID: 17501930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2007 Mar;189(6):2274-82. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

The AppA and PpsR proteins from Rhodobacter sphaeroides can establish a
redox-dependent signal chain but fail to transmit blue-light signals in other
bacteria.

Jäger A(1), Braatsch S, Haberzettl K, Metz S, Osterloh L, Han Y, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32,
35392 Giessen, Germany.

The AppA protein of Rhodobacter sphaeroides has the unique ability to sense and
transmit redox and light signals. In response to decreasing oxygen tension, AppA 
antagonizes the transcriptional regulator PpsR, which represses the expression of
photosynthesis genes, including the puc operon. This mechanism, which is based on
direct protein-protein interaction, is prevented by blue-light absorption of the 
BLUF domain located in the N-terminal part of AppA. In order to test whether AppA
and PpsR are sufficient to transmit redox and light signals, we expressed these
proteins in three different bacterial species and monitored oxygen- and
blue-light-dependent puc expression either directly or by using a
luciferase-based reporter construct. The AppA/PpsR system could mediate
redox-dependent gene expression in the alphaproteobacteria Rhodobacter capsulatus
and Paracoccus denitrificans but not in the gammaproteobacterium Escherichia
coli. Analysis of a prrA mutant strain of R. sphaeroides strongly suggests that
light-dependent gene expression requires a balanced interplay of the AppA/PpsR
system with the PrrA response regulator. Therefore, the AppA/PpsR system was
unable to establish light signaling in other bacteria. Based on our data, we
present a model for the interdependence of AppA/PpsR signaling and the PrrA
transcriptional activator.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01699-06 
PMCID: PMC1899404
PMID: 17209035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 25;273(52):35319-25.

AppA, a redox regulator of photosystem formation in Rhodobacter sphaeroides
2.4.1, is a flavoprotein. Identification of a novel fad binding domain.

Gomelsky M(1), Kaplan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The AppA protein is required for increased photosystem gene expression upon
transition of the facultatively photoheterotrophic bacterium Rhodobacter
sphaeroides 2.4.1 from aerobic to anaerobic photosynthetic conditions. AppA shows
no obvious similarity to proteins with established function. Genetic evidence
suggests that its effect is exerted through modulation of the activity of the
repressor PpsR, which controls expression of multiple photosystem genes. To gain 
insight into the nature of AppA involvement in redox-dependent photosystem gene
expression, the appA gene was overexpressed in Escherichia coli. AppA was
produced as insoluble inclusion bodies. The purified inclusion bodies were found 
to contain FAD. By overexpressing various deletion derivatives, we were able to
localize the region of AppA sufficient for FAD binding to approximately 120
amino-terminal residues. To assess the role of FAD binding in AppA function, we
constructed an AppA derivative lacking the entire FAD binding domain.
Surprisingly, this derivative complemented the AppA null mutant undergoing
transition from aerobic to anaerobic photosynthetic growth conditions almost to
the same extent as the full-length AppA protein. When the sequence of the
amino-terminal portion of AppA was examined, it was shown not to contain any
known flavin binding motifs. However, two open reading frames of unknown
function, showing significant similarity to the amino terminus of AppA, were
identified, i.e. Synechocystis sp. Srl1694 and E. coli F403. The latter gene was 
amplified and overexpressed in E. coli, and the partially purified F403 protein
was found to contain FAD as a cofactor. We have therefore concluded that the
amino terminus of AppA represents a novel FAD binding domain present in a small
group of bacterial proteins. The binding of FAD by AppA may be the first clue as 
to how this regulatory protein is involved in redox-regulated reactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.52.35319 
PMID: 9857073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 1994 May;176(10):2869-76.

Sequencing, chromosomal inactivation, and functional expression in Escherichia
coli of ppsR, a gene which represses carotenoid and bacteriochlorophyll synthesis
in Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Penfold RJ(1), Pemberton JM.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane,
Australia.

Sequencing of a DNA fragment that causes trans suppression of bacteriochlorophyll
and carotenoid levels in Rhodobacter sphaeroides revealed two genes: orf-192 and 
ppsR. The ppsR gene alone is sufficient for photopigment suppression.
Inactivation of the R. sphaeroides chromosomal copy of ppsR results in
overproduction of both bacteriochlorophyll and carotenoid pigments. The deduced
464-amino-acid protein product of ppsR is homologous to the CrtJ protein of
Rhodobacter capsulatus and contains a helix-turn-helix domain that is found in
various DNA-binding proteins. Removal of the helix-turn-helix domain renders PpsR
nonfunctional. The promoter of ppsR is located within the coding region of the
upstream orf-192 gene. When this promoter is replaced by a lacZ promoter, ppsR is
expressed in Escherichia coli. An R. sphaeroides DNA fragment carrying crtD', -E,
and -F and bchC, -X, -Y, and -Z' exhibited putative promoter activity in E. coli.
This putative promoter activity could be suppressed by PpsR in both E. coli and
R. sphaeroides. These results suggest that PpsR is a transcriptional repressor.
It could potentially act by binding to a putative regulatory palindrome found in 
the 5' flanking regions of a number of R. sphaeroides and R. capsulatus
photosynthesis genes.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.176.10.2869-2876.1994 
PMCID: PMC205441
PMID: 8188588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseB) AND (mdaB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Feb 23;9:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42.

Genome-wide analysis of the PreA/PreB (QseB/QseC) regulon of Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium.

Merighi M(1), Septer AN, Carroll-Portillo A, Bhatiya A, Porwollik S, McClelland
M, Gunn JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. gunn.43@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: The Salmonella PreA/PreB two-component system (TCS) is an ortholog of
the QseBC TCS of Escherichia coli. In both Salmonella and E. coli, this system
has been shown to affect motility and virulence in response to quorum-sensing and
hormonal signals, and to affect the transcription of the Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) pmrAB operon, which encodes an important
virulence-associated TCS.
RESULTS: To determine the PreA/PreB regulon in S. Typhimurium, we performed DNA
microarrays comparing the wild type strain and various preA and/or preB mutants
in the presence of ectopically expressed preA (qseB). These data confirmed our
previous findings of the negative effect of PreB on PreA gene regulation and
identified candidate PreA-regulated genes. A proportion of the activated loci
were previously identified as PmrA-activated genes (yibD, pmrAB, cptA, etc.) or
were genes located in the local region around preA, including the preAB operon.
The transcriptional units were defined in this local region by RT-PCR, suggesting
three PreA activated operons composed of preA-preB, mdaB-ygiN, and ygiW-STM3175. 
Several putative virulence-related phenotypes were examined for preAB mutants,
resulting in the observation of a host cell invasion and slight virulence defect 
of a preAB mutant. Contrary to previous reports on this TCS, we were unable to
show a PreA/PreB-dependent effect of the quorum-sensing signal AI-2 or of
epinephrine on S. Typhimurium with regard to bacterial motility.
CONCLUSION: This work further characterizes this unorthadox OmpR/EnvZ class TCS
and provides novel candidate regulated genes for further study. This first
in-depth study of the PreA/PreB regulatory system phenotypes and regulation
suggests significant comparative differences to the reported function of the
orthologous QseB/QseC in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42 
PMCID: PMC2653508
PMID: 19236707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseB) AND (ygiN)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Feb 23;9:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42.

Genome-wide analysis of the PreA/PreB (QseB/QseC) regulon of Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium.

Merighi M(1), Septer AN, Carroll-Portillo A, Bhatiya A, Porwollik S, McClelland
M, Gunn JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. gunn.43@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: The Salmonella PreA/PreB two-component system (TCS) is an ortholog of
the QseBC TCS of Escherichia coli. In both Salmonella and E. coli, this system
has been shown to affect motility and virulence in response to quorum-sensing and
hormonal signals, and to affect the transcription of the Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) pmrAB operon, which encodes an important
virulence-associated TCS.
RESULTS: To determine the PreA/PreB regulon in S. Typhimurium, we performed DNA
microarrays comparing the wild type strain and various preA and/or preB mutants
in the presence of ectopically expressed preA (qseB). These data confirmed our
previous findings of the negative effect of PreB on PreA gene regulation and
identified candidate PreA-regulated genes. A proportion of the activated loci
were previously identified as PmrA-activated genes (yibD, pmrAB, cptA, etc.) or
were genes located in the local region around preA, including the preAB operon.
The transcriptional units were defined in this local region by RT-PCR, suggesting
three PreA activated operons composed of preA-preB, mdaB-ygiN, and ygiW-STM3175. 
Several putative virulence-related phenotypes were examined for preAB mutants,
resulting in the observation of a host cell invasion and slight virulence defect 
of a preAB mutant. Contrary to previous reports on this TCS, we were unable to
show a PreA/PreB-dependent effect of the quorum-sensing signal AI-2 or of
epinephrine on S. Typhimurium with regard to bacterial motility.
CONCLUSION: This work further characterizes this unorthadox OmpR/EnvZ class TCS
and provides novel candidate regulated genes for further study. This first
in-depth study of the PreA/PreB regulatory system phenotypes and regulation
suggests significant comparative differences to the reported function of the
orthologous QseB/QseC in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42 
PMCID: PMC2653508
PMID: 19236707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseC) AND (qseB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Gene. 2021 Mar 20;773:145374. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374. Epub 2020 Dec 23.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling is required for correct timing of
replication initiation and cell motility.

Wu D(1), Baigalmaa L(1), Yao Y(2), Li G(1), Su M(3), Fan L(4), Morigen(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China; Department of Neurology, Inner Mongolia People's Hospital, Hohhot 010017, 
China.
(3)Medical College, Dalian University, Dalian 116622, China. Electronic address: 
suming50@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: lifei.fan@imu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: morigenm@hotmail.com.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling regulates expressions of more than 50
genes encoding flagellar proteins and proteins associated with virulence. Here we
found that absence of the QseB/QseC signaling led to an early initiation of
chromosomal replication and higher concentration of DnaA which is initiator for
replication. The upstream region of dnaA promoter contains three potential QseB
binding sites and absence of these binding sites increased transcription of the
dnaA gene in wild-type cells but not in the cells lacking the qseB/qseC genes,
showing that the QseB/QseC signaling regulates dnaA expression through the QseB
binding sites. Also increased cell motility but neither cell size nor growth rate
in ΔqseBC and ΔqseB cells was observed and these effects were reversed by ectopic
expression of QseBC. Further, it was found that QseB interacted with the DnaK
chaperone and FtsZ cell division protein in vivo, and absence of DnaK or partial 
inactivation of FtsZ decreased cell motility. Thus, we conclude that the
QseB/QseC signaling modulates timing of replication initiation by regulating
expression of DnaA, coordinates cell motility with cell division through
interacting with the DnaK and FtsZ protein.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374 
PMID: 33359126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Feb;115(2):191-207. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14609. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

A genetic screen to identify factors affected by undecaprenyl phosphate recycling
uncovers novel connections to morphogenesis in Escherichia coli.

Jorgenson MA(1), Bryant JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.

Undecaprenyl phosphate (Und-P) is an essential lipid carrier that ferries cell
wall intermediates across the cytoplasmic membrane in bacteria. Und-P is
generated by dephosphorylating undecaprenyl pyrophosphate (Und-PP). In
Escherichia coli, BacA, PgpB, YbjG, and LpxT dephosphorylate Und-PP and are
conditionally essential. To identify vulnerabilities that arise when Und-P
metabolism is defective, we developed a genetic screen for synthetic interactions
which, in combination with ΔybjG ΔlpxT ΔbacA, are lethal or reduce fitness. The
screen uncovered novel connections to cell division, DNA replication/repair,
signal transduction, and glutathione metabolism. Further analysis revealed
several new morphogenes; loss of one of these, qseC, caused cells to enlarge and 
lyse. QseC is the sensor kinase component of the QseBC two-component system. Loss
of QseC causes overactivation of the QseB response regulator by PmrB
cross-phosphorylation. Here, we show that deleting qseB completely reverses the
shape defect of ΔqseC cells, as does overexpressing rprA (a small RNA).
Surprisingly, deleting pmrB only partially suppressed qseC-related shape defects.
Thus, QseB is activated by multiple factors in QseC's absence and prior functions
ascribed to QseBC may originate from cell wall defects. Altogether, our findings 
provide a framework for identifying new determinants of cell integrity that could
be targeted in future therapies.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14609 
PMID: 32979869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 23;10(1):15479. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8.

Complete genome sequence of fish-pathogenic Aeromonas hydrophila HX-3 and a
comparative analysis: insights into virulence factors and quorum sensing.

Jin L(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Yang W(3)(4), Qiao Z(3)(4), Zhang X(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China.
(2)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China.
(3)College of Food and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo,
315211, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Protein Food Deep Processing Technology of Zhejiang
Province, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(5)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.
(6)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.

The gram-negative, aerobic, rod-shaped bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, the
causative agent of motile aeromonad septicaemia, has attracted increasing
attention due to its high pathogenicity. Here, we constructed the complete genome
sequence of a virulent strain, A. hydrophila HX-3 isolated from Pseudosciaena
crocea and performed comparative genomics to investigate its virulence factors
and quorum sensing features in comparison with those of other Aeromonas isolates.
HX-3 has a circular chromosome of 4,941,513 bp with a 61.0% G + C content
encoding 4483 genes, including 4318 protein-coding genes, and 31 rRNA, 127 tRNA
and 7 ncRNA operons. Seventy interspersed repeat and 153 tandem repeat sequences,
7 transposons, 8 clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, and
39 genomic islands were predicted in the A. hydrophila HX-3 genome. Phylogeny and
pan-genome were also analyzed herein to confirm the evolutionary relationships on
the basis of comparisons with other fully sequenced Aeromonas genomes. In
addition, the assembled HX-3 genome was successfully annotated against the
Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins database (76.03%), Gene Ontology
database (18.13%), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome pathway database
(59.68%). Two-component regulatory systems in the HX-3 genome and virulence
factors profiles through comparative analysis were predicted, providing insights 
into pathogenicity. A large number of genes related to the AHL-type 1 (ahyI,
ahyR), LuxS-type 2 (luxS, pfs, metEHK, litR, luxOQU) and QseBC-type 3 (qseB,
qseC) autoinducer systems were also identified. As a result of the expression of 
the ahyI gene in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3), combined UPLC-MS/MS profiling led
to the identification of several new N-acyl-homoserine lactone compounds
synthesized by AhyI. This genomic analysis determined the comprehensive QS
systems of A. hydrophila, which might provide novel information regarding the
mechanisms of virulence signatures correlated with QS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8 
PMCID: PMC7512022
PMID: 32968153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2020 Sep 16;54(5):888-898. doi: 10.33594/000000276.

In Silico and in Vitro Study of Trace Amines (TA) and Dopamine (DOP) Interaction 
with Human Alpha 1-Adrenergic Receptor and the Bacterial Adrenergic Receptor
QseC.

Luqman A(1)(2)(3), Kharisma VD(3), Ruiz RA(1), Götz F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Biology Department, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Generasi Biologi Indonesia (Genbinesia) Foundation, Gresik, Indonesia.
(4)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
friedrich.goetz@uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Trace amines (TA) are small organic compounds that have
neuromodulator activity due to their interaction with some neuron-related
receptors, such as trace amine associated receptors (TAARs), α2-adrenergic
receptor (α2-AR) and ß-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR). However, there is little
information on whether TA and dopamine (DOP) can interact with other adrenergic
receptors (ARs) such as the mammalian α1-AR and the bacterial counterpart QseC,
which is involved in quorum sensing of some Gram-negative pathogens. The aim of
this study was to investigate the interaction of TA and DOP with α1-AR and QseC.
METHODS: We performed an in silico study using 3D structure from SWISS MODEL and 
analyzed the protein interaction via molecular docking using PyMol, PoseView and 
PyRX 8.0. For the in vitro study, we investigated the QseC kinase activity by
measuring the remaining ATP in a reaction containing QseC-enriched membrane
incubated together with purified QseB and EPI, TA, DOP, or PTL respectively. We
also measured the intracellular Ca++ levels, which represents the α1-AR
activation, in LNCAP (pancreatic cell line) cells treated with EPI, TA, DOP and
PTL respectively using a fluorescence-based assay. The LNCAP cell proliferation
was measured using an MTT-based assay.
RESULTS: Our in silico analysis revealed that TAs and DOP have high binding
affinity to the human α1-AR and the bacterial adrenergic receptor (QseC),
comparable to epinephrine (EPI). Both are membrane-bound kinases. Experimental
studies with pancreatic cell line (LNCAP) showed that the TAs and DOP act as
α1-AR antagonist by counteracting the effect of EPI. In the presence of EPI, TA
and DOP trigger an increase of the intracellular Ca++ levels in the LNCAP cells
leading to an inhibition of cell proliferation. Although in silico data suggest
an interaction of TA and DOP with QseC, they do not inhibit the kinase activity
of QseC, a histidine kinase receptor involved in quorum sensing which is also
sensitive to EPI.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that the TAs and DOP act as α1-AR antagonist but no 
effect was observed for QseC.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000276 
PMID: 32930525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.


5. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2020 Nov;17(11):720-727. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810. Epub
2020 Aug 19.

Emergence of Transferable mcr-9 Gene-Carrying Colistin-Resistant Salmonella
enterica Dessau ST14 Isolated from Retail Chicken Meat in Korea.

Cha MH(1)(2), Woo GJ(1), Lee W(2), Kim SH(2), Woo JH(2), Kim J(3), Ryu JG(4),
Kwak HS(2), Chi YM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Safety and Evaluation, Department of Biotechnology, Korea
University Graduate School, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Food Microbiology, National Institute of Food and Drug Safety
Evaluation, Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Bacterial Diseases, Center for Laboratory Control of Infectious
Diseases, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongju, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Microbial Safety Team, National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural
Development Administration, Wanju, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Colistin is an important antibiotic currently used to manage infections caused by
multidrug-resistant pathogens in both humans and livestock animals. A new mobile 
colistin-resistance (mcr-9) gene was recently discovered; this discovery
highlighted the need for rigorous monitoring of bacterial resistance against
colistin. Salmonella is one of the major pathogens responsible for foodborne
illnesses; however, there is minimal information regarding the presence of mcr
genes in foodborne Salmonella strains. The aim of this study was to investigate
the presence of mcr genes among 178 Salmonella strains isolated from chicken meat
in Korea. Antimicrobial susceptibility was measured using the broth microdilution
method. Bioinformatics characterization of colistin-resistant strains and genetic
environment of the mcr-9 gene were analyzed using next-generation sequencing.
Transferability of the mcr-9 carrying colistin-resistant Salmonella strain was
tested using broth-mating conjugation. Thirteen of the 178 Salmonella isolates
showed colistin resistance, but only one strain, Salmonella Dessau ST14
(KUFSE-SAL043) from a traditional chicken market in Korea, carried an mcr family 
gene, mcr-9. This strain also carried other acquired antimicrobial resistance
genes such as blaTEM-1B, qnrS1, and aac(6')-Iaa. Only the IncX1 plasmid replicon 
type was detected in this strain. In the strain KUFSE-SAL043, the mcr-9 gene was 
located between two insertion sequences, IS903B and IS26, followed by the
downstream regulatory genes qseB-like and qseC-like, which were located between
IS1R and ΔIS1R. Conjugation tests revealed that the mcr-9 gene was successfully
transferred to Escherichia coli J53 at a mean frequency of 2.03 × 10-7. This is
the first report of a transferable mcr-9 gene in Salmonella isolated from chicken
meat in Korea, highlighting the possibility of transfer of colistin resistance.
Therefore, the wide use of colistin should be reconsidered, and a One Health
perspective should be adopted to monitor the antimicrobial resistance of
Enterobacteriaceae strains in humans, livestock, and the environment.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810 
PMCID: PMC7698652 [Available on 2021-11-01]
PMID: 32830987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jul;81:104273. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104273. Epub
2020 Mar 4.

Plasmid carrying mcr-9 from an extensively drug-resistant NDM-1-producing
Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. quasipneumoniae clinical isolate.

Faccone D(1), Martino F(2), Albornoz E(2), Gomez S(1), Corso A(2), Petroni A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Godoy Cruz 2290 (C1425FQB),
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
apetroni@anlis.gob.ar.

The extensively drug-resistant NDM-1-producing Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. 
quasipneumoniae M17277 (Kqsq-M17277) was only susceptible to colistin and
fosfomycin. Whole genome sequencing of Kqsq-M17277 was performed through Illumina
(short reads) and Oxford Nanopore Technologies (long reads). Hybrid assembly of
short and long reads rendered circular contigs of the Kqsq-M17277 chromosome and 
three plasmids of 477,340 (p17277A_477), 138,998 (p17277C_138, which harbored
blaNDM-1) and 123,307 bp (p17277B_123). In silico analysis showed that
p17277A_477 was not previously described, belonged to the IncHI2 incompatibility 
group and contained 51 complete or partial (≥300 bp) insertion sequences and Tn3 
family transposons, which encompassed, as a whole, 14% of the p17277A_477
sequence. In silico search for antimicrobial resistance genes revealed that
p17277A_477 harbored the recently described plasmid-encoded mcr-9 gene (colistin 
resistance), besides other resistance genes. This is the first worldwide report
of a K. quasipneumoniae harboring mcr-9 and blaNDM-1 and the first report of
mcr-9 in Latin America. This gene was embedded in a genetic structure, i.e.,
IS903B-like/mcr-9/wbuC/IS26, that was found in 71% of the mcr-9-harboring
sequences of the NCBI Nucleotide Collection database. The qseC and qseB genes
involved in mcr-9 expression were not found in Kqsq-M17277, which could explain
its colistin susceptibility. Fifteen additional resistance genes were detected in
p17277A_477. Ten of them [aac(6')-IIc, aadA2, aph(3')-Ia, blaDHA-1, dfrA12,
ereA2, mphA, qnrB4, sul1 and tet(D)] were found clustered within a 44,907-bp-long
array of IS26-bounded resistance genes. The plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance
gene qnrB4 was located in a complex class 1 integron within this IS26-bounded
resistance gene cluster. p17277A_477 was self-transferable by conjugation to
Escherichia coli J53, azide-resistant. The Tra1 and Tra2 conjugative transfer
regions of the IncHI2 plasmid R478 were found by in silico search. p17277A_477 is
a complex plasmid that provides a large baggage of both resistance genes and
genetic resources for plasmid rearrangements and additional resistance gene
acquisition.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104273 
PMID: 32145334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.


7. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Mar;20:285-289. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.08.007.
Epub 2019 Sep 5.

A link between the newly described colistin resistance gene mcr-9 and clinical
Enterobacteriaceae isolates carrying blaSHV-12 from horses in Sweden.

Börjesson S(1), Greko C(2), Myrenås M(2), Landén A(2), Nilsson O(2), Pedersen
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Antimicrobial Strategies, National Veterinary 
Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden; Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
stefan.borjesson@liu.se.
(2)Department of Animal Health and Antimicrobial Strategies, National Veterinary 
Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the occurrence of the newly 
described transferable colistin resistance gene mcr-9 in extended-spectrum
β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing clinical Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses in 
Sweden.
METHODS: A total of 56 whole-genome sequenced ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae
isolates from horses were subjected to in silico detection of antimicrobial
resistance genes and identification of plasmid replicons types. The colistin
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for mcr-positive isolates was determined
by broth microdilution. Relatedness between Enterobacteriaceae carrying mcr genes
was determined by multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and core genome MLST.
RESULTS: Thirty ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses were
positive for the colistin resistance gene mcr-9. These isolates included
Enterobacter cloacae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella oxytoca and Citrobacter
freundii and belonged to diverse MLST sequence types within each species. Two of 
the mcr-9-containing isolates originated from the same horse. All mcr-9-positive 
isolates had colistin MICs below or equal to the EUCAST epidemiological cut-off
value of 2 mg/L and were negative for the two potential regulatory genes
qseB-like and qseC-like for mcr-9. Except for one isolate carrying only
blaTEM-1B, all of the isolates carried blaSHV-12 and blaTEM-1B, and were all
considered multidrug-resistant as they harboured genes encoding resistance to
aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, fosfomycin, macrolides, quinolones,
sulfonamides, trimethoprim and tetracyclines. Plasmid replicon types IncHI2 and
IncHI2A were detected in all mcr-9-positive isolates.
CONCLUSION: The occurrence of mcr-9 was common among clinical ESBL-producing
Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses in Sweden and was linked to the
ESBL-encoding gene blaSHV-12 and plasmid replicon types IncHI2 and IncHI2A.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.08.007 
PMID: 31494305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Aug 23;63(9). pii: e00965-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00965-19. Print 2019 Sep.

mcr-9, an Inducible Gene Encoding an Acquired Phosphoethanolamine Transferase in 
Escherichia coli, and Its Origin.

Kieffer N(1)(2), Royer G(3)(4)(5), Decousser JW(3)(4), Bourrel AS(3)(4), Palmieri
M(1)(6), Ortiz De La Rosa JM(1)(2), Jacquier H(4)(7), Denamur E(4)(8), Nordmann
P(1)(2)(9)(10), Poirel L(11)(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Molecular Microbiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Science, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)INSERM European Unit (IAME, France), University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
(3)Laboratoire de Bactériologie et d'Hygiène-Hospitalière, CHU Henri Mondor,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Créteil, France.
(4)IAME, UMR1137 INSERM, Université Paris Diderot, Université Paris Nord,
Emerging Antibiotic Resistance in Gram-Negative Bacteria, Paris, France.
(5)LABGeM, Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, 
Université Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(6)bioMérieux, Data Analytics Unit, La Balme Les Grottes, France.
(7)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Infectious Agents, Saint
Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal University Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(8)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Bichat, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)Swiss National Reference Center for Emerging Antibiotic Resistance (NARA),
University of Fribourg, Switzerland.
(10)Institute for Microbiology, University of Lausanne and University Hospital
Centre, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(11)Medical and Molecular Microbiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Science, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland laurent.poirel@unifr.ch.

Erratum in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Oct 22;63(11):.

The plasmid-located mcr-9 gene, encoding a putative phosphoethanolamine
transferase, was identified in a colistin-resistant human fecal Escherichia coli 
strain belonging to a very rare phylogroup, the D-ST69-O15:H6 clone. This MCR-9
protein shares 33% to 65% identity with the other plasmid-encoded MCR-type
enzymes identified (MCR-1 to -8) that have been found as sources of acquired
resistance to polymyxins in Enterobacteriaceae Analysis of the lipopolysaccharide
of the MCR-9-producing isolate revealed a function similar to that of MCR-1 by
adding a phosphoethanolamine group to lipid A and subsequently modifying the
structure of the lipopolysaccharide. However, a minor impact on susceptibility to
polymyxins was noticed once the mcr-9 gene was cloned and produced in an E. coli 
K-12-derived strain. Nevertheless, we showed here that subinhibitory
concentrations of colistin induced the expression of the mcr-9 gene, leading to
increased MIC levels. This inducible expression was mediated by a two-component
regulatory system encoded by the qseC and qseB genes located downstream of mcr-9 
Genetic analysis showed that the mcr-9 gene was carried by an IncHI2 plasmid. In 
silico analysis revealed that the plasmid-encoded MCR-9 shared significant amino 
acid identity (ca. 80%) with the chromosomally encoded MCR-like proteins from
Buttiauxella spp. In particular, Buttiauxella gaviniae was found to harbor a gene
encoding MCR-BG, sharing 84% identity with MCR-9. That gene was neither expressed
nor inducible in its original host, which was fully susceptible to polymyxins.
This work showed that mcr genes may circulate silently and remain undetected
unless induced by colistin.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00965-19 
PMCID: PMC6709461
PMID: 31209009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2017 Dec 5;200(1). pii: e00564-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00564-17. Print
2018 Jan 1.

Conversion of Norepinephrine to 3,4-Dihdroxymandelic Acid in Escherichia coli
Requires the QseBC Quorum-Sensing System and the FeaR Transcription Factor.

Pasupuleti S(1), Sule N(1), Manson MD(2), Jayaraman A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
mike@mail.bio.tamu.edu arulj@tamu.edu.
(3)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA mike@mail.bio.tamu.edu arulj@tamu.edu.

The detection of norepinephrine (NE) as a chemoattractant by Escherichia coli
strain K-12 requires the combined action of the TynA monoamine oxidase and the
FeaB aromatic aldehyde dehydrogenase. The role of these enzymes is to convert NE 
into 3,4-dihydroxymandelic acid (DHMA), which is a potent chemoattractant sensed 
by the Tsr chemoreceptor. These two enzymes must be induced by prior exposure to 
NE, and cells that are exposed to NE for the first time initially show minimal
chemotaxis toward it. The induction of TynA and FeaB requires the QseC
quorum-sensing histidine kinase, and the signaling cascade requires new protein
synthesis. Here, we demonstrate that the cognate response regulator for QseC, the
transcription factor QseB, is also required for induction. The related
quorum-sensing kinase QseE appears not to be part of the signaling pathway, but
its cognate response regulator, QseF, which is also a substrate for
phosphotransfer from QseC, plays a nonessential role. The promoter of the feaR
gene, which encodes a transcription factor that has been shown to be essential
for the expression of tynA and feaB, has two predicted QseB-binding sites. One of
these sites appears to be in an appropriate position to stimulate transcription
from the P1 promoter of the feaR gene. This study unites two well-known pathways:
one for expression of genes regulated by catecholamines (QseBC) and one for
expression of genes required for metabolism of aromatic amines (FeaR, TynA, and
FeaB). This cross talk allows E. coli to convert the host-derived and
chemotactically inert NE into the potent bacterial chemoattractant
DHMA.IMPORTANCE The chemotaxis of E. coli K-12 to norepinephrine (NE) requires
the conversion of NE to 3,4-dihydroxymandleic acid (DHMA), and DHMA is both an
attractant and inducer of virulence gene expression for a pathogenic
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strain. The induction of virulence by DHMA and
NE requires QseC. The results described here show that the cognate response
regulator for QseC, QseB, is also required for conversion of NE into DHMA.
Production of DHMA requires induction of a pathway involved in the metabolism of 
aromatic amines. Thus, the QseBC sensory system provides a direct link between
virulence and chemotaxis, suggesting that chemotaxis to host signaling molecules 
may require that those molecules are first metabolized by bacterial enzymes to
generate the actual chemoattractant.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00564-17 
PMCID: PMC5717157
PMID: 29038253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Jul 15;489(1):70-75. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.05.077. Epub 2017 May 15.

Cross-talk between bacterial two-component systems drives stepwise regulation of 
flagellar biosynthesis in swarming development.

Wei CF(1), Tsai YH(1), Tsai SH(1), Lin CS(1), Chang CJ(1), Lu CC(2), Huang HC(3),
Lai HC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Center for
Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Fu Jen University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Center for
Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan; Research Center for Chinese Herbal Medicine and Research Center 
for Food and Cosmetic Safety, College of Human Ecology, Chang Gung University of 
Science and Technology, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Chang Gung Immunology Consortium, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: hclai@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Swarming motility is a mode of bacterial movement over a solid surface driven by 
rotating flagella in a coordinated manner. Bacteria can use two-component system 
(TCS), which typically comprises a sensor kinase and a specific cognate response 
regulator, to properly react to environmental changes. We previously showed that 
the TCS RssAB suppresses flagellar biosynthesis master regulator flhDC
specifically in swarming lag phase to control surface migration timing without
affecting expansion rate in Serratia marcescens swarming development. Here we
demonstrate that the TCS QseBC, which has been found in several human pathogens
involved in flagellar and virulence regulation, has cross-talk with RssAB. We
demonstrate that the phosphorylated QseB repressed flhDC expression, reducing
swarming migration rate with modest effect on migration initiation. Unexpectedly,
the QseC can dephosphorylate non-cognate response regulator RssB. Deletion of
qseC prolonged RssAB signaling, reduced flhDC expression, and delayed migration
initiation. Our data suggest that QseC is a flagellar biosynthesis activator by
de-repressing RssB ∼ P and QseB ∼ P respectively in lag and migration phases in a
stage-specific manner in swarming development.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.05.077 
PMID: 28522292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseC) AND (qseC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. BMC Microbiol. 2021 Aug 24;21(1):233. doi: 10.1186/s12866-021-02266-3.

Correction to: Human microbiota modulation via QseC sensor kinase mediated in the
Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreak strain infection in microbiome model.

Ribeiro TRM(1), Salgaço MK(2), Adorno MAT(3), da Silva MA(4), Piazza RMF(4),
Sivieri K(2), Moreira CG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São
Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São Paulo
State University, (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Hydraulics and Sanitation, School of Engineering of São Carlos, 
University of São Paulo (USP), São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(4)Bacteriology Laboratoty, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São
Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil. cg.moreira@unesp.br.

Erratum for
    BMC Microbiol. 2021 Jun 2;21(1):163.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-021-02266-3 
PMCID: PMC8383425
PMID: 34429061 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2021 Jun 2;21(1):163. doi: 10.1186/s12866-021-02220-3.

Human microbiota modulation via QseC sensor kinase mediated in the Escherichia
coli O104:H4 outbreak strain infection in microbiome model.

Machado Ribeiro TR(1), Salgaço MK(2), Adorno MAT(3), da Silva MA(4), Piazza
RMF(4), Sivieri K(2), Moreira CG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São
Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São Paulo
State University (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Hydraulics and Sanitation, School of Engineering of São Carlos, 
University of São Paulo (USP), São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(4)Bacteriology Laboratoty, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São
Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara, SP, Brazil. cg.moreira@unesp.br.

Erratum in
    BMC Microbiol. 2021 Aug 24;21(1):233.

BACKGROUND: The intestinal microbiota plays a crucial role in human health,
adjusting its composition and the microbial metabolites protects the gut against 
invading microorganisms. Enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) is an important
diarrheagenic pathogen, which may cause acute or persistent diarrhea (≥14 days). 
The outbreak strain has the potent Shiga toxin, forms a dense biofilm and
communicate via QseBC two-component system regulating the expression of many
important virulence factors.
RESULTS: Herein, we investigated the QseC histidine sensor kinase role in the
microbiota shift during O104:H4 C227-11 infection in the colonic model SHIME®
(Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem) and in vivo mice model.
The microbiota imbalance caused by C227-11 infection affected ỿ-Proteobacteria
and Lactobacillus spp. predominance, with direct alteration in intestinal
metabolites driven by microbiota change, such as Short-chain fatty acids (SCFA). 
However, in the absence of QseC sensor kinase, the microbiota recovery was
delayed on day 3 p.i., with change in the intestinal production of SCFA, like an 
increase in acetate production. The higher predominance of Lactobacillus spp. in 
the microbiota and significant augmented qseC gene expression levels were also
observed during C227-11 mice infection upon intestinal depletion. Novel insights 
during pathogenic bacteria infection with the intestinal microbiota were
observed. The QseC kinase sensor seems to have a role in the microbiota shift
during the infectious process by Shiga toxin-producing EAEC C227-11.
CONCLUSIONS: The QseC role in C227-11 infection helps to unravel the intestine
microbiota modulation and its metabolites during SHIME® and in vivo models,
besides they contribute to elucidate bacterial intestinal pathogenesis and the
microbiota relationships.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-021-02220-3 
PMCID: PMC8170955
PMID: 34078285 


3. Gene. 2021 Mar 20;773:145374. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374. Epub 2020 Dec 23.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling is required for correct timing of
replication initiation and cell motility.

Wu D(1), Baigalmaa L(1), Yao Y(2), Li G(1), Su M(3), Fan L(4), Morigen(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China; Department of Neurology, Inner Mongolia People's Hospital, Hohhot 010017, 
China.
(3)Medical College, Dalian University, Dalian 116622, China. Electronic address: 
suming50@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: lifei.fan@imu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: morigenm@hotmail.com.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling regulates expressions of more than 50
genes encoding flagellar proteins and proteins associated with virulence. Here we
found that absence of the QseB/QseC signaling led to an early initiation of
chromosomal replication and higher concentration of DnaA which is initiator for
replication. The upstream region of dnaA promoter contains three potential QseB
binding sites and absence of these binding sites increased transcription of the
dnaA gene in wild-type cells but not in the cells lacking the qseB/qseC genes,
showing that the QseB/QseC signaling regulates dnaA expression through the QseB
binding sites. Also increased cell motility but neither cell size nor growth rate
in ΔqseBC and ΔqseB cells was observed and these effects were reversed by ectopic
expression of QseBC. Further, it was found that QseB interacted with the DnaK
chaperone and FtsZ cell division protein in vivo, and absence of DnaK or partial 
inactivation of FtsZ decreased cell motility. Thus, we conclude that the
QseB/QseC signaling modulates timing of replication initiation by regulating
expression of DnaA, coordinates cell motility with cell division through
interacting with the DnaK and FtsZ protein.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374 
PMID: 33359126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell. 2020 Oct 29;183(3):650-665.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.022. Epub 2020 
Oct 7.

Endocannabinoids Inhibit the Induction of Virulence in Enteric Pathogens.

Ellermann M(1), Pacheco AR(1), Jimenez AG(1), Russell RM(1), Cuesta S(1), Kumar
A(1), Zhu W(2), Vale G(3), Martin SA(4), Raj P(5), McDonald JG(3), Winter SE(2), 
Sperandio V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA; Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.
(3)Center for Human Nutrition, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA.
(5)Microbiome Research Lab, Department of Immunology, UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA; Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA. Electronic address: vanessa.sperandio@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Trends Microbiol. 2021 Mar;29(3):185-187.

Endocannabinoids are host-derived lipid hormones that fundamentally impact
gastrointestinal (GI) biology. The use of cannabis and other exocannabinoids as
anecdotal treatments for various GI disorders inspired the search for mechanisms 
by which these compounds mediate their effects, which led to the discovery of the
mammalian endocannabinoid system. Dysregulated endocannabinoid signaling was
linked to inflammation and the gut microbiota. However, the effects of
endocannabinoids on host susceptibility to infection has not been explored. Here,
we show that mice with elevated levels of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoyl
glycerol (2-AG) are protected from enteric infection by Enterobacteriaceae
pathogens. 2-AG directly modulates pathogen function by inhibiting virulence
programs essential for successful infection. Furthermore, 2-AG antagonizes the
bacterial receptor QseC, a histidine kinase encoded within the core
Enterobacteriaceae genome that promotes the activation of pathogen-associated
type three secretion systems. Taken together, our findings establish that
endocannabinoids are directly sensed by bacteria and can modulate bacterial
function.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.022 
PMCID: PMC7606741 [Available on 2021-10-29]
PMID: 33031742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.


5. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Feb;115(2):191-207. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14609. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

A genetic screen to identify factors affected by undecaprenyl phosphate recycling
uncovers novel connections to morphogenesis in Escherichia coli.

Jorgenson MA(1), Bryant JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.

Undecaprenyl phosphate (Und-P) is an essential lipid carrier that ferries cell
wall intermediates across the cytoplasmic membrane in bacteria. Und-P is
generated by dephosphorylating undecaprenyl pyrophosphate (Und-PP). In
Escherichia coli, BacA, PgpB, YbjG, and LpxT dephosphorylate Und-PP and are
conditionally essential. To identify vulnerabilities that arise when Und-P
metabolism is defective, we developed a genetic screen for synthetic interactions
which, in combination with ΔybjG ΔlpxT ΔbacA, are lethal or reduce fitness. The
screen uncovered novel connections to cell division, DNA replication/repair,
signal transduction, and glutathione metabolism. Further analysis revealed
several new morphogenes; loss of one of these, qseC, caused cells to enlarge and 
lyse. QseC is the sensor kinase component of the QseBC two-component system. Loss
of QseC causes overactivation of the QseB response regulator by PmrB
cross-phosphorylation. Here, we show that deleting qseB completely reverses the
shape defect of ΔqseC cells, as does overexpressing rprA (a small RNA).
Surprisingly, deleting pmrB only partially suppressed qseC-related shape defects.
Thus, QseB is activated by multiple factors in QseC's absence and prior functions
ascribed to QseBC may originate from cell wall defects. Altogether, our findings 
provide a framework for identifying new determinants of cell integrity that could
be targeted in future therapies.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14609 
PMID: 32979869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 23;10(1):15479. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8.

Complete genome sequence of fish-pathogenic Aeromonas hydrophila HX-3 and a
comparative analysis: insights into virulence factors and quorum sensing.

Jin L(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Yang W(3)(4), Qiao Z(3)(4), Zhang X(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China.
(2)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China.
(3)College of Food and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo,
315211, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Protein Food Deep Processing Technology of Zhejiang
Province, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(5)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.
(6)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.

The gram-negative, aerobic, rod-shaped bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, the
causative agent of motile aeromonad septicaemia, has attracted increasing
attention due to its high pathogenicity. Here, we constructed the complete genome
sequence of a virulent strain, A. hydrophila HX-3 isolated from Pseudosciaena
crocea and performed comparative genomics to investigate its virulence factors
and quorum sensing features in comparison with those of other Aeromonas isolates.
HX-3 has a circular chromosome of 4,941,513 bp with a 61.0% G + C content
encoding 4483 genes, including 4318 protein-coding genes, and 31 rRNA, 127 tRNA
and 7 ncRNA operons. Seventy interspersed repeat and 153 tandem repeat sequences,
7 transposons, 8 clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, and
39 genomic islands were predicted in the A. hydrophila HX-3 genome. Phylogeny and
pan-genome were also analyzed herein to confirm the evolutionary relationships on
the basis of comparisons with other fully sequenced Aeromonas genomes. In
addition, the assembled HX-3 genome was successfully annotated against the
Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins database (76.03%), Gene Ontology
database (18.13%), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome pathway database
(59.68%). Two-component regulatory systems in the HX-3 genome and virulence
factors profiles through comparative analysis were predicted, providing insights 
into pathogenicity. A large number of genes related to the AHL-type 1 (ahyI,
ahyR), LuxS-type 2 (luxS, pfs, metEHK, litR, luxOQU) and QseBC-type 3 (qseB,
qseC) autoinducer systems were also identified. As a result of the expression of 
the ahyI gene in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3), combined UPLC-MS/MS profiling led
to the identification of several new N-acyl-homoserine lactone compounds
synthesized by AhyI. This genomic analysis determined the comprehensive QS
systems of A. hydrophila, which might provide novel information regarding the
mechanisms of virulence signatures correlated with QS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8 
PMCID: PMC7512022
PMID: 32968153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2020 Sep 16;54(5):888-898. doi: 10.33594/000000276.

In Silico and in Vitro Study of Trace Amines (TA) and Dopamine (DOP) Interaction 
with Human Alpha 1-Adrenergic Receptor and the Bacterial Adrenergic Receptor
QseC.

Luqman A(1)(2)(3), Kharisma VD(3), Ruiz RA(1), Götz F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Biology Department, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Generasi Biologi Indonesia (Genbinesia) Foundation, Gresik, Indonesia.
(4)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
friedrich.goetz@uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Trace amines (TA) are small organic compounds that have
neuromodulator activity due to their interaction with some neuron-related
receptors, such as trace amine associated receptors (TAARs), α2-adrenergic
receptor (α2-AR) and ß-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR). However, there is little
information on whether TA and dopamine (DOP) can interact with other adrenergic
receptors (ARs) such as the mammalian α1-AR and the bacterial counterpart QseC,
which is involved in quorum sensing of some Gram-negative pathogens. The aim of
this study was to investigate the interaction of TA and DOP with α1-AR and QseC.
METHODS: We performed an in silico study using 3D structure from SWISS MODEL and 
analyzed the protein interaction via molecular docking using PyMol, PoseView and 
PyRX 8.0. For the in vitro study, we investigated the QseC kinase activity by
measuring the remaining ATP in a reaction containing QseC-enriched membrane
incubated together with purified QseB and EPI, TA, DOP, or PTL respectively. We
also measured the intracellular Ca++ levels, which represents the α1-AR
activation, in LNCAP (pancreatic cell line) cells treated with EPI, TA, DOP and
PTL respectively using a fluorescence-based assay. The LNCAP cell proliferation
was measured using an MTT-based assay.
RESULTS: Our in silico analysis revealed that TAs and DOP have high binding
affinity to the human α1-AR and the bacterial adrenergic receptor (QseC),
comparable to epinephrine (EPI). Both are membrane-bound kinases. Experimental
studies with pancreatic cell line (LNCAP) showed that the TAs and DOP act as
α1-AR antagonist by counteracting the effect of EPI. In the presence of EPI, TA
and DOP trigger an increase of the intracellular Ca++ levels in the LNCAP cells
leading to an inhibition of cell proliferation. Although in silico data suggest
an interaction of TA and DOP with QseC, they do not inhibit the kinase activity
of QseC, a histidine kinase receptor involved in quorum sensing which is also
sensitive to EPI.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that the TAs and DOP act as α1-AR antagonist but no 
effect was observed for QseC.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000276 
PMID: 32930525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.


8. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 24;11:1501. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01501. eCollection 
2020.

Influence of Catecholamines (Epinephrine/Norepinephrine) on Biofilm Formation and
Adhesion in Pathogenic and Probiotic Strains of Enterococcus faecalis.

Cambronel M(1), Nilly F(1), Mesguida O(1), Boukerb AM(1), Racine PJ(1), Baccouri 
O(2), Borrel V(1), Martel J(1), Fécamp F(1), Knowlton R(1), Zimmermann K(3),
Domann E(4), Rodrigues S(1), Feuilloley M(1), Connil N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Signaux et Microenvironnement EA 4312, Université
de Rouen, Normandie Université, Évreux, France.
(2)Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Bioactive Molecules, National Institute 
of Applied Sciences and Technology, University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia.
(3)SymbioPharm GmbH, Herborn, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology, German Centre for Infection Research,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Enterococcus faecalis has controversial status due to its emerging role in
nosocomial infections, while some strains with beneficial effects are used as
probiotics and starter cultures in dairy industry. These bacteria can be found as
resident or transient germs in the gut or on skin, where they are continually
exposed to various eukaryotic molecules. In this context, the aim of our work was
to evaluate the effect of the catecholamine stress hormones, epinephrine (Epi),
and norepinephrine (NE) on some Enterococcus strains. Four E. faecalis strains
were included in this study: E. faecalis MMH594 and E. faecalis V583, pathogenic 
strains of clinical origin, E. faecalis Symbioflor 1 clone DSM 16431, a
pharmaceutical probiotic, and E. faecalis OB15, a probiotic strain previously
isolated from Tunisian rigouta (Baccouri et al., 2019). Epi was found to modulate
the formation of biofilm (biovolume and thickness) in E. faecalis, whether
pathogens or probiotics. NE had less effect on biofilm formation of these
bacteria. We also investigated the effect of Epi and NE on adhesion of E.
faecalis to eukaryotic cells as it is the first step of colonization of the host.
Epi was found to significantly enhance the adhesion of MMH594 and OB15 to
Caco-2/TC7 intestinal cells and HaCaT keratinocyte cells, whereas NE
significantly increased the adhesion of V583 and Symbioflor 1 DSM 16431 to
Caco-2/TC7 cells, the adhesion of MMH594, Symbioflor 1 DSM 16431, and OB15 to
HaCaT cells. Analysis of a putative adrenergic sensor of Epi/NE in E. faecalis,
compared to QseC, the Escherichia coli adrenergic receptor, allowed the
identification of VicK as the nearest protein to QseC with 29% identity and 46%
similarity values. Structure modeling and molecular docking of VicK corroborated 
the hypothesis of possible interactions of this putative adrenergic sensor with
Epi and NE, with binding energies of -4.08 and -4.49 kcal/mol, respectively. In
conclusion, this study showed for the first time that stress hormones could
increase biofilm formation and adhesion to eukaryotic cells in E. faecalis.
Future experiments will aim to confirm by in vivo studies the role of VicK as
adrenergic sensor in E. faecalis probiotic and pathogen strains. This may help to
develop new strategies of antagonism/competition in the gut or skin ecological
niches, and to prevent the colonization by opportunistic pathogens.

Copyright © 2020 Cambronel, Nilly, Mesguida, Boukerb, Racine, Baccouri, Borrel,
Martel, Fécamp, Knowlton, Zimmermann, Domann, Rodrigues, Feuilloley and Connil.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01501 
PMCID: PMC7396564
PMID: 32849320 


9. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2020 Nov;17(11):720-727. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810. Epub
2020 Aug 19.

Emergence of Transferable mcr-9 Gene-Carrying Colistin-Resistant Salmonella
enterica Dessau ST14 Isolated from Retail Chicken Meat in Korea.

Cha MH(1)(2), Woo GJ(1), Lee W(2), Kim SH(2), Woo JH(2), Kim J(3), Ryu JG(4),
Kwak HS(2), Chi YM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Safety and Evaluation, Department of Biotechnology, Korea
University Graduate School, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Food Microbiology, National Institute of Food and Drug Safety
Evaluation, Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Bacterial Diseases, Center for Laboratory Control of Infectious
Diseases, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongju, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Microbial Safety Team, National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural
Development Administration, Wanju, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Colistin is an important antibiotic currently used to manage infections caused by
multidrug-resistant pathogens in both humans and livestock animals. A new mobile 
colistin-resistance (mcr-9) gene was recently discovered; this discovery
highlighted the need for rigorous monitoring of bacterial resistance against
colistin. Salmonella is one of the major pathogens responsible for foodborne
illnesses; however, there is minimal information regarding the presence of mcr
genes in foodborne Salmonella strains. The aim of this study was to investigate
the presence of mcr genes among 178 Salmonella strains isolated from chicken meat
in Korea. Antimicrobial susceptibility was measured using the broth microdilution
method. Bioinformatics characterization of colistin-resistant strains and genetic
environment of the mcr-9 gene were analyzed using next-generation sequencing.
Transferability of the mcr-9 carrying colistin-resistant Salmonella strain was
tested using broth-mating conjugation. Thirteen of the 178 Salmonella isolates
showed colistin resistance, but only one strain, Salmonella Dessau ST14
(KUFSE-SAL043) from a traditional chicken market in Korea, carried an mcr family 
gene, mcr-9. This strain also carried other acquired antimicrobial resistance
genes such as blaTEM-1B, qnrS1, and aac(6')-Iaa. Only the IncX1 plasmid replicon 
type was detected in this strain. In the strain KUFSE-SAL043, the mcr-9 gene was 
located between two insertion sequences, IS903B and IS26, followed by the
downstream regulatory genes qseB-like and qseC-like, which were located between
IS1R and ΔIS1R. Conjugation tests revealed that the mcr-9 gene was successfully
transferred to Escherichia coli J53 at a mean frequency of 2.03 × 10-7. This is
the first report of a transferable mcr-9 gene in Salmonella isolated from chicken
meat in Korea, highlighting the possibility of transfer of colistin resistance.
Therefore, the wide use of colistin should be reconsidered, and a One Health
perspective should be adopted to monitor the antimicrobial resistance of
Enterobacteriaceae strains in humans, livestock, and the environment.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810 
PMCID: PMC7698652 [Available on 2021-11-01]
PMID: 32830987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Med Sci Monit. 2020 Aug 7;26:e922986. doi: 10.12659/MSM.922986.

The Release of Norepinephrine in C57BL/6J Mice Treated with 6-Hydroxydopamine
(6-OHDA) is Associated with Translocations in Enteric Escherichia coli via the
QseC Histidine Kinase Receptor.

Meng J(1), Chen H(2), Lv Q(2), Luo X(2), Yang K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND We aimed to investigate the effects of norepinephrine (NE) released
from endogenous stores on bacterial translocation of Escherichia coli in mice by 
administration of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), which selectively destroys
noradrenergic nerve terminals. MATERIAL AND METHODS E. coli strain BW25113 and
its derivatives (BW25113ΔqseC and BW25113ΔqseC pQseC) were used in this study.
The serum concentrations of endotoxin were analyzed. The strains BW25113,
BW25113ΔqseC, and BW25113ΔqseC pQseC were detected respectively in tissue
specimens harvested from mice treated with 6-OHDA. RESULTS Mice treated with
BW25113ΔqseC showed reduced levels of bacterial translocation following
administration of 6-OHDA compared with mice treated with BW25113. The defect of
E. coli QseC receptor caused the norepinephrine-QseC signal chain to be
interrupted, and the invasiveness and penetrating power of the bacteria on the
intestinal mucosa was weakened, eventually leading to a significant decrease in
the incidence of bacterial translocation. CONCLUSIONS NE modulates the
interaction of enteric bacterial pathogens with their hosts via QseC. The
blockade of the QseC receptor-mediated effects may be useful to attenuate
bacterial translocation.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.922986 
PMCID: PMC7433386
PMID: 32764532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcnR) AND (frmA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcnR) AND (frmR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19806-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Generating a Metal-responsive Transcriptional Regulator to Test What Confers
Metal Sensing in Cells.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Chakrabarti B(1), Foster AW(1),
Lurie-Luke E(3), Huggins TG(2), Robinson NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Centre, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040, and.
(3)Life Sciences Open Innovation, London Innovation Centre, Procter and Gamble
Technical Centres, Ltd., Egham TW20 9NW, United Kingdom.
(4)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (a CsoR/RcnR-like
transcriptional de-repressor) is shown to repress the frmRA operator-promoter,
and repression is alleviated by formaldehyde but not manganese, iron, cobalt,
nickel, copper, or Zn(II) within cells. In contrast, repression by a mutant
FrmRE64H (which gains an RcnR metal ligand) is alleviated by cobalt and Zn(II).
Unexpectedly, FrmR was found to already bind Co(II), Zn(II), and Cu(I), and
moreover metals, as well as formaldehyde, trigger an allosteric response that
weakens DNA affinity. However, the sensory metal sites of the cells' endogenous
metal sensors (RcnR, ZntR, Zur, and CueR) are all tighter than FrmR for their
cognate metals. Furthermore, the endogenous metal sensors are shown to
out-compete FrmR. The metal-sensing FrmRE64H mutant has tighter metal affinities 
than FrmR by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Gain of cobalt sensing by
FrmRE64H remains enigmatic because the cobalt affinity of FrmRE64H is
substantially weaker than that of the endogenous cobalt sensor. Cobalt sensing
requires glutathione, which may assist cobalt access, conferring a kinetic
advantage. For Zn(II), the metal affinity of FrmRE64H approaches the metal
affinities of cognate Zn(II) sensors. Counter-intuitively, the allosteric
coupling free energy for Zn(II) is smaller in metal-sensing FrmRE64H compared
with nonsensing FrmR. By determining the copies of FrmR and FrmRE64H tetramers
per cell, then estimating promoter occupancy as a function of intracellular
Zn(II) concentration, we show how a modest tightening of Zn(II) affinity, plus
weakened DNA affinity of the apoprotein, conspires to make the relative
properties of FrmRE64H (compared with ZntR and Zur) sufficient to sense Zn(II)
inside cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427 
PMCID: PMC4528141
PMID: 26109070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcsB) AND (ompC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Aug;197(16):2713-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00263-15. Epub 2015 Jun
15.

YjjQ Represses Transcription of flhDC and Additional Loci in Escherichia coli.

Wiebe H(1), Gürlebeck D(2), Groß J(1), Dreck K(1), Pannen D(1), Ewers C(3),
Wieler LH(4), Schnetz K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center for Infection Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Hygiene and Infectious Diseases of Animals,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(4)Center for Infection Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
schnetz@uni-koeln.de.

The presumptive transcriptional regulator YjjQ has been identified as being
virulence associated in avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC). In this work,
we characterize YjjQ as transcriptional repressor of the flhDC operon, encoding
the master regulator of flagellar synthesis, and of additional loci. The latter
include gfc (capsule 4 synthesis), ompC (outer membrane porin C), yfiRNB
(regulated c-di-GMP synthesis), and loci of poorly defined function (ybhL and
ymiA-yciX). We identify the YjjQ DNA-binding sites at the flhDC and gfc promoters
and characterize a DNA-binding sequence motif present at all promoters found to
be repressed by YjjQ. At the flhDC promoter, the YjjQ DNA-binding site overlaps
the RcsA-RcsB DNA-binding site. RcsA-RcsB likewise represses the flhDC promoter, 
but the repression by YjjQ and that by RcsA-RcsB are independent of each other.
These data suggest that YjjQ is an additional regulator involved in the complex
control of flhDC at the level of transcription initiation. Furthermore, we show
that YjjQ represses motility of the E. coli K-12 laboratory strain and of
uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) strains CFT073 and 536. Regulation of flhDC, yfiRNB,
and additional loci by YjjQ may be features relevant for
pathogenicity.IMPORTANCE: Escherichia coli is a commensal and pathogenic
bacterium causing intra- and extraintestinal infections in humans and farm
animals. The pathogenicity of E. coli strains is determined by their particular
genome content, which includes essential and associated virulence factors that
control the cellular physiology in the host environment. However, the gene pools 
of commensal and pathogenic E. coli are not clearly differentiated, and the
function of virulence-associated loci needs to be characterized. In this study,
we characterize the function of yjjQ, encoding a transcription regulator that was
identified as being virulence associated in avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC). We
characterize YjjQ as transcriptional repressor of flagellar motility and of
additional loci related to pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00263-15 
PMCID: PMC4507341
PMID: 26078445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcsB) AND (rcsB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2021 May 14;433(10):166944. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944. Epub 2021
Mar 16.

Integrating Multimeric Threading With High-throughput Experiments for Structural 
Interactome of Escherichia coli.

Gong W(1), Guerler A(2), Zhang C(2), Warner E(2), Li C(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China. Electronic address:
chunhuali@bjut.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. Electronic address:
zhng@umich.edu.

Genome-wide protein-protein interaction (PPI) determination remains a significant
unsolved problem in structural biology. The difficulty is twofold since
high-throughput experiments (HTEs) have often a relatively high false-positive
rate in assigning PPIs, and PPI quaternary structures are more difficult to solve
than tertiary structures using traditional structural biology techniques. We
proposed a uniform pipeline, Threpp, to address both problems. Starting from a
pair of monomer sequences, Threpp first threads both sequences through a complex 
structure library, where the alignment score is combined with HTE data using a
naïve Bayesian classifier model to predict the likelihood of two chains to
interact with each other. Next, quaternary complex structures of the identified
PPIs are constructed by reassembling monomeric alignments with dimeric threading 
frameworks through interface-specific structural alignments. The pipeline was
applied to the Escherichia coli genome and created 35,125 confident PPIs which is
4.5-fold higher than HTE alone. Graphic analyses of the PPI networks show a
scale-free cluster size distribution, consistent with previous studies, which was
found critical to the robustness of genome evolution and the centrality of
functionally important proteins that are essential to E. coli survival.
Furthermore, complex structure models were constructed for all predicted E. coli 
PPIs based on the quaternary threading alignments, where 6771 of them were found 
to have a high confidence score that corresponds to the correct fold of the
complexes with a TM-score >0.5, and 39 showed a close consistency with the later 
released experimental structures with an average TM-score = 0.73. These results
demonstrated the significant usefulness of threading-based homologous modeling in
both genome-wide PPI network detection and complex structural construction.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944 
PMID: 33741411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.


2. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Dec 3;8:611900. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.611900.
eCollection 2020.

Multi-Path Optimization for Efficient Production of 2'-Fucosyllactose in an
Engineered Escherichia coli C41 (DE3) Derivative.

Ni Z(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Wu J(1)(3), Ge Y(1)(2), Liao Y(1)(2), Yuan L(1)(3), Chen 
X(1)(3), Yao J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plasma Physics, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China.
(2)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(3)Wuhan Zhongke Optics Valley Green Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Wuhan, China.

2'-fucosyllactose (2'-FL), one of the simplest but most abundant oligosaccharides
in human milk, has been demonstrated to have many positive benefits for the
healthy development of newborns. However, the high-cost production and limited
availability restrict its widespread use in infant nutrition and further research
on its potential functions. In this study, on the basis of previous achievements,
we developed a powerful cell factory by using a lacZ-mutant Escherichia coli C41 
(DE3)ΔZ to ulteriorly increase 2'-FL production by feeding inexpensive glycerol. 
Initially, we co-expressed the genes for GDP-L-fucose biosynthesis and
heterologous α-1,2-fucosyltransferase in C41(DE3)ΔZ through different
plasmid-based expression combinations, functionally constructing a preferred
route for 2'-FL biosynthesis. To further boost the carbon flux from GDP-L-fucose 
toward 2'-FL synthesis, deletion of chromosomal genes (wcaJ, nudD, and nudK)
involved in the degradation of the precursors GDP-L-fucose and GDP-mannose were
performed. Notably, the co-introduction of two heterologous positive regulators, 
RcsA and RcsB, was confirmed to be more conducive to GDP-L-fucose formation and
thus 2'-FL production. Further a genomic integration of an individual copy of
α-1,2-fucosyltransferase gene, as well as the preliminary optimization of
fermentation conditions enabled the resulting engineered strain to achieve a high
titer and yield. By collectively taking into account the intracellular lactose
utilization, GDP-L-fucose availability, and fucosylation activity for 2'-FL
production, ultimately a highest titer of 2'-FL in our optimized conditions
reached 6.86 g/L with a yield of 0.92 mol/mol from lactose in the batch
fermentation. Moreover, the feasibility of mass production was demonstrated in a 
50-L fed-batch fermentation system in which a maximum titer of 66.80 g/L 2'-FL
was achieved with a yield of 0.89 mol 2'-FL/mol lactose and a productivity of
approximately 0.95 g/L/h 2'-FL. As a proof of concept, our preliminary 2'-FL
production demonstrated a superior production performance, which will provide a
promising candidate process for further industrial production.

Copyright © 2020 Ni, Li, Wu, Ge, Liao, Yuan, Chen and Yao.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.611900 
PMCID: PMC7793955
PMID: 33425876 

Conflict of interest statement: JW, LY, and XC were employed by the company Wuhan
Zhongke Optics Valley Green Biotechnology Co. Ltd. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 29;117(52):33530-33539. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2006209117. Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Identification of Z nucleotides as an ancient signal for two-component system
activation in bacteria.

Vázquez-Ciros OJ(1), Alvarez AF(1), Georgellis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, 04510 Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, 04510 Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

Two-component systems (TCSs) in bacteria are molecular circuits that allow the
perception of and response to diverse stimuli. These signaling circuits rely on
phosphoryl-group transfers between transmitter and receiver domains of sensor
kinase and response regulator proteins, and regulate several cellular processes
in response to internal or external cues. Phosphorylation, and thereby
activation, of response regulators has been demonstrated to occur by their
cognate histidine kinases but also by low molecular weight phosphodonors such as 
acetyl phosphate and carbamoyl phosphate. Here, we present data indicating that
the intermediates of the de novo syntheses of purines and histidine,
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl 5'-monophosphate (ZMP)
and/or 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl 5'-triphosphate
(ZTP), activate the response regulator UvrY, by promoting its autophosphorylation
at the conserved aspartate at position 54. Moreover, these Z nucleotides are
shown to also activate the nonrelated response regulators ArcA, CpxR, RcsB, and
PhoQ. We propose that ZMP and/or ZTP act as alarmones for a wide range of
response regulators in vivo, providing a novel mechanism by which they could
impact gene expression in response to metabolic cues.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2006209117 
PMCID: PMC7777188
PMID: 33318202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


4. Gene. 2021 Feb 5;768:145289. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145289. Epub 2020 Nov 10.

RcsB-dependent regulation of type VI secretion system in porcine extra-intestinal
pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Hu L(1), Yu F(1), Liu M(2), Chen J(3), Zong B(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen T(1), Wang
C(1), Zhang T(1), Zhang J(1), Zhu Y(1), Wang X(4), Chen H(4), Tan C(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, China.
(2)Hubei Biopesticide Engineering Research Centre, Hubei Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Wuhan 430064, Hubei, China.
(3)Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 511436, Guangdong, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, China; Key
Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The Cooperative
Innovation Centre for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, China; Key
Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The Cooperative
Innovation Centre for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China.
Electronic address: tanchen@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Signal transduction system and specialized secretory devices are crucial for
bacteria to sense and adequately adapt in adverse environmental conditions.
Therefore, it's crucial for microbes to detect and respond to lethal attacks when
envelope is perturbed so as to minimize and fix the damage in milieu. We
investigated the adaptive response of porcine extra-intestinal pathogenic
Escherichia coli PCN033 to polymyxin B challenge. Treatment with polymyxin B led 
to rapid and robust activation of Rcs system via RcsF, as well as the
accumulation of reactive oxygen species. ExPEC T6SS expression was strongly
induced by RcsB in Rcs system, resulting in the reduction in the damage to
constitute a survival strategy. Finally, we show that T6SS of ExPEC is involved
in its pathogenicity in mouse model. Compared with the wild type strain, the
deletion of T6SS genes led to a decrease in the organ colonization ability, and
the RcsFS2DM3Q mutant that caused Rcs activation had a stronger colonization
ability than the wild type strain. In conclusion, Rcs system orchestrates Rcs
cascade to trigger antioxidant defense of T6SS, and presents a typical model in
which a bacterium reschedule its transcription network via the Rcs phosphorelay
pathway in response to membrane perturbations for survival and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145289 
PMID: 33181257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochimie. 2021 Jan;180:90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.10.016. Epub 2020 Oct 
27.

Gentisate 1,2-dioxygenase from the gram-positive bacteria Rhodococcus opacus 1CP:
Identical active sites vs. different substrate selectivities.

Subbotina NM(1), Chernykh AM(1), Taranov AI(2), Shebanova AD(1), Moiseeva OV(1), 
Ferraroni M(3), Kolomytseva MP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Enzymatic Degradation of Organic Compounds, G.K. Skryabin
Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms of RAS, Federal
Research Center, Pushchino Center for Biological Research of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences, Prospekt Nauki 5, Pushchino, Moscow Region, 142290, Russia.
(2)Pushchino State Institute of Natural Sciences, Prospekt Nauki 3, Pushchino,
Moscow Region, 142290, Russia.
(3)Dipartimento di Chimica "Ugo Schiff", Università degli Studi di Firenze, Via
Della Lastruccia 3, I-50019, Sesto Fiorentino, FI, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Enzymatic Degradation of Organic Compounds, G.K. Skryabin
Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms of RAS, Federal
Research Center, Pushchino Center for Biological Research of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences, Prospekt Nauki 5, Pushchino, Moscow Region, 142290, Russia.
Electronic address: mkolomytseva@rambler.ru.

Gentisate 1,2-dioxygenases belong to the class III ring-cleaving dioxygenases
catalyzing key reactions of aromatic compounds degradation by aerobic
microorganisms. In the present work, the results of complete molecular,
structural, and functional investigations of the gentisate 1,2-dioxygenase
(rho-GDO) from a gram-positive bacterium Rhodococcus opacus 1CP growing on
3-hydroxybenzoate as a sole source of carbon and energy are presented. The
purified enzyme showed a narrow substrate specificity. Among fourteen
investigated substrate analogues only gentisate was oxidized by the enzyme, what 
can be potentially applied in biosensor technologies. The rho-GDO encoding gene
was identified in the genomic DNA of the R. opacus 1CP. According to phylogenetic
analysis, the rho-GDO belongs to the group of apparently most recently acquired
activities in bacterial genera Rhodococcus, Arthrobacter, Corynebacterium,
Nocardia, Amycolatopsis, Comamonas, and Streptomyces. Homology modeling the
rho-GDO 3D-structure demonstrates the composition identity of the first-sphere
residues of the active site of rho-GDO and salicylate 1,2-dioxygenase from
Pseudaminobacter salicylatoxidans (RCSB PDB: 2PHD), despite of their different
substrate specificities. The phenomenon described for the first time for this
family of enzymes supposes a more complicated mechanism of substrate specificity 
than previously imagined, and makes the rho-GDO a convenient model for a novel
direction of structure-function relationship studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.10.016 
PMID: 33122105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have not known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper. All authors have not and will have not any actual or potential conflict of
interest including any financial, personal or other relationships with other
people or organizations.


6. PLoS Genet. 2020 Jul 27;16(7):e1008610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

IgaA negatively regulates the Rcs Phosphorelay via contact with the RcsD
Phosphotransfer Protein.

Wall EA(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Two-component systems and phosphorelays play central roles in the ability of
bacteria to rapidly respond to changing environments. In E. coli and related
enterobacteria, the complex Rcs phosphorelay is a critical player in the
bacterial response to antimicrobial peptides, beta-lactam antibiotics, and other 
disruptions at the cell surface. The Rcs system is unusual in that an inner
membrane protein, IgaA, is essential due to its negative regulation of the
RcsC/RcsD/RcsB phosphorelay. While it is known that IgaA transduces signals from 
the outer membrane lipoprotein RcsF, how it interacts with the phosphorelay has
remained unknown. Here we performed in vivo interaction assays and genetic
dissection of the critical proteins and found that IgaA interacts with the
phosphorelay protein RcsD, and that this interaction is necessary for regulation.
Interactions between IgaA and RcsD within their respective periplasmic domains of
these two proteins anchor repression of signaling. However, the signaling
response depends on a second interaction between cytoplasmic loop 1 of IgaA and a
truncated Per-Arndt-Sim (PAS-like) domain in RcsD. A single point mutation in the
PAS-like domain increased interactions between the two proteins and blocked
induction of the phosphorelay. IgaA may regulate RcsC, the histidine kinase that 
initiates phosphotransfer through the phosphorelay, indirectly, via its contacts 
with RcsD. Unlike RcsD, and unlike many other histidine kinases, the periplasmic 
domain of RcsC is dispensable for the response to signals that induce the Rcs
phosphorelay system. The multiple contacts between IgaA and RcsD constitute a
poised sensing system, preventing potentially toxic over-activation of this
phosphorelay while enabling it to rapidly and quantitatively respond to signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610 
PMCID: PMC7418988
PMID: 32716926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


7. FEBS J. 2021 Mar;288(5):1599-1613. doi: 10.1111/febs.15485. Epub 2020 Aug 7.

Structural insights into the multiple binding modes of Dimethyl Fumarate (DMF)
and its analogs to the Kelch domain of Keap1.

Unni S(1), Deshmukh P(1), Krishnappa G(1), Kommu P(1), Padmanabhan B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, India.

The activation of the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)
transcription function has been implicated in the protection of neurodegenerative
diseases. The cytoplasmic protein, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1),
negatively regulates Nrf2. The Keap1-Nrf2 pathway is a potential therapeutic
target for tackling free-radical damage. Dimethyl fumarate (DMF) is currently an 
approved drug for the treatment of relapsing multiple sclerosis. Recent studies
showed that DMF modifies the reactive cysteines in the BTB domain of Keap1 and
thus activates Nrf2 transcription function. Intriguingly, our crystal structure
studies revealed that DMF also binds to the β-propeller domain (Keap1-DC) of
Keap1. The crystal structure of the complex, refined to 1.54 Å resolution,
revealed unexpected features: DMF binds (a) to the Nrf2-binding site (bottom
region of Keap1-DC, site 1) with moderate interaction, and (b) to the top region 
of Keap1-DC, near to the blade II (site 2). The specificity of the binding 'site 
2' was found to be unique to blade II of the β-propeller domain. The newly
identified 'site 2' region in Keap1-DC may have a different functional role to
regulate Nrf2. Moreover, the crystal structures of Keap1-DC in complex with the
DMF analogs, including monoethyl fumarate, fumarate, and itaconate, also
exhibited similar binding modes with Keap1-DC. Binding studies confirmed that DMF
binds, in a nanomolar range, to the Keap1-DC region as well as the BTB domain of 
Keap1. Furthermore, the competitive binding assay in the presence of the Nrf2
peptide affirmed the direct binding of DMF at the Nrf2-binding region of
Keap1-DC. Overall, our studies suggest that the drug molecule, DMF, binds at
multiple sites of Keap1 and thus potentially activates Nrf2 function through
covalent as well as the noncovalent mode of action, to combat oxidative stress.
DATABASE: Structural data are available in RCSB-protein data bank database(s)
under the accession numbers 6LRZ, 7C60, and 7C5E.

© 2020 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15485 
PMID: 32672401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Rep. 2020 Jun 16;31(11):107766. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107766.

Differential Cellular Response to Translocated Toxic Effectors and Physical
Penetration by the Type VI Secretion System.

Kamal F(1), Liang X(2), Manera K(1), Pei TT(3), Kim H(1), Lam LG(1), Pun A(1),
Hersch SJ(1), Dong TG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecosystem and Public Health, University of Calgary, 3330
Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N4Z6, Canada.
(2)Department of Ecosystem and Public Health, University of Calgary, 3330
Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N4Z6, Canada; State Key Laboratory of Microbial
Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental 
Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research
Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
(4)Department of Ecosystem and Public Health, University of Calgary, 3330
Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N4Z6, Canada; State Key Laboratory of Microbial
Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental 
Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. Electronic address: tdong@ucalgary.ca.

The type VI secretion system (T6SS) is a lethal microbial weapon that injects a
large needle-like structure carrying toxic effectors into recipient cells through
physical penetration. How recipients respond to physical force and effectors
remains elusive. Here, we use a series of effector mutants of Vibrio cholerae to 
determine how T6SS elicits response in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia
coli. We show that TseL, but no other effectors or physical puncture, triggers
the tit-for-tat response of P. aeruginosa H1-T6SS. Although E. coli is sensitive 
to all periplasmically expressed effectors, P. aeruginosa is most sensitive to
TseL alone. We identify a number of stress response pathways that confer
protection against TseL. Physical puncture of T6SS has a moderate inhibitory
effect only on envelope-impaired tolB and rseA mutants. Our data reveal that
recipient cells primarily respond to effector toxicity but not to physical
contact, and they rely on the stress response for immunity-independent
protection.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107766 
PMID: 32553162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.


9. FEBS J. 2021 Jan;288(2):582-599. doi: 10.1111/febs.15348. Epub 2020 May 19.

Catalytic activity of human guanylate-binding protein 1 coupled to the release of
structural restraints imposed by the C-terminal domain.

Ince S(1), Zhang P(1), Kutsch M(2), Krenczyk O(1), Shydlovskyi S(1), Herrmann
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Chemistry I, Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Human guanylate-binding protein 1 (hGBP-1) shows a dimer-induced acceleration of 
the GTPase activity yielding GDP as well as GMP. While the head-to-head
dimerization of the large GTPase (LG) domain is well understood, the role of the 
rest of the protein, particularly of the GTPase effector domain (GED), in
dimerization and GTP hydrolysis is still obscure. In this study, with truncations
and point mutations on hGBP-1 and by means of biochemical and biophysical
methods, we demonstrate that the intramolecular communication between the LG
domain and the GED (LG:GED) is crucial for protein dimerization and
dimer-stimulated GTP hydrolysis. In the course of GTP binding and γ-phosphate
cleavage, conformational changes within hGBP-1 are controlled by a chain of amino
acids ranging from the region near the nucleotide-binding pocket to the distant
LG:GED interface and lead to the release of the GED from the LG domain. This
opening of the structure allows the protein to form GED:GED contacts within the
dimer, in addition to the established LG:LG interface. After releasing the
cleaved γ-phosphate, the dimer either dissociates yielding GDP as the final
product or it stays dimeric to further cleave the β-phosphate yielding GMP. The
second phosphate cleavage step, that is, the formation of GMP, is even more
strongly coupled to structural changes and thus more sensitive to structural
restraints imposed by the GED. Altogether, we depict a comprehensive mechanism of
GTP hydrolysis catalyzed by hGBP-1, which provides a detailed molecular
understanding of the enzymatic activity connected to large structural
rearrangements of the protein. DATABASE: Structural data are available in RCSB
Protein Data Bank under the accession numbers: 1F5N, 1DG3, 2B92.

© 2020 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15348 
PMID: 32352209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS J. 2021 Jan;288(1):262-280. doi: 10.1111/febs.15324. Epub 2020 Apr 28.

Reverse protein engineering of a novel 4-domain copper nitrite reductase reveals 
functional regulation by protein-protein interaction.

Sasaki D(1), Watanabe TF(1)(2), Eady RR(1), Garratt RC(2), Antonyuk SV(1),
Hasnain SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Group, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative
Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK.
(2)The São Carlos Institute of Physics, University of São Paulo, São Carlos,
Brazil.

Cu-containing nitrite reductases that convert NO2 - to NO are critical enzymes in
nitrogen-based energy metabolism. Among organisms in the order Rhizobiales, we
have identified two copies of nirK, one encoding a new class of 4-domain CuNiR
that has both cytochrome and cupredoxin domains fused at the N terminus and the
other, a classical 2-domain CuNiR (Br2D NiR). We report the first enzymatic
studies of a novel 4-domain CuNiR from Bradyrhizobium sp. ORS 375 (BrNiR), its
genetically engineered 3- and 2-domain variants, and Br2D NiR revealing up to
~ 500-fold difference in catalytic efficiency in comparison with classical
2-domain CuNiRs. Contrary to the expectation that tethering would enhance
electron delivery by restricting the conformational search by having a
self-contained donor-acceptor system, we demonstrate that 4-domain BrNiR utilizes
N-terminal tethering for downregulating enzymatic activity instead. Both Br2D NiR
and an engineered 2-domain variant of BrNiR (Δ(Cytc-Cup) BrNiR) have 3 to 5% NiR 
activity compared to the well-characterized 2-domain CuNiRs from Alcaligenes
xylosoxidans (AxNiR) and Achromobacter cycloclastes (AcNiR). Structural
comparison of Δ(Cytc-Cup) BrNiR and Br2D NiR with classical 2-domain AxNiR and
AcNiR reveals structural differences of the proton transfer pathway that could be
responsible for the lowering of activity. Our study provides insights into unique
structural and functional characteristics of naturally occurring 4-domain CuNiR
and its engineered 3- and 2-domain variants. The reverse protein engineering
approach utilized here has shed light onto the broader question of the evolution 
of transient encounter complexes and tethered electron transfer complexes.
ENZYME: Copper-containing nitrite reductase (CuNiR) (EC 1.7.2.1). DATABASE: The
atomic coordinate and structure factor of Δ(Cytc-Cup) BrNiR and Br2D NiR have
been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/) under the
accession code 6THE and 6THF, respectively.

© 2020 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15324 
PMID: 32255260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcsB) AND (rcsD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2021 May 14;433(10):166944. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944. Epub 2021
Mar 16.

Integrating Multimeric Threading With High-throughput Experiments for Structural 
Interactome of Escherichia coli.

Gong W(1), Guerler A(2), Zhang C(2), Warner E(2), Li C(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China. Electronic address:
chunhuali@bjut.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. Electronic address:
zhng@umich.edu.

Genome-wide protein-protein interaction (PPI) determination remains a significant
unsolved problem in structural biology. The difficulty is twofold since
high-throughput experiments (HTEs) have often a relatively high false-positive
rate in assigning PPIs, and PPI quaternary structures are more difficult to solve
than tertiary structures using traditional structural biology techniques. We
proposed a uniform pipeline, Threpp, to address both problems. Starting from a
pair of monomer sequences, Threpp first threads both sequences through a complex 
structure library, where the alignment score is combined with HTE data using a
naïve Bayesian classifier model to predict the likelihood of two chains to
interact with each other. Next, quaternary complex structures of the identified
PPIs are constructed by reassembling monomeric alignments with dimeric threading 
frameworks through interface-specific structural alignments. The pipeline was
applied to the Escherichia coli genome and created 35,125 confident PPIs which is
4.5-fold higher than HTE alone. Graphic analyses of the PPI networks show a
scale-free cluster size distribution, consistent with previous studies, which was
found critical to the robustness of genome evolution and the centrality of
functionally important proteins that are essential to E. coli survival.
Furthermore, complex structure models were constructed for all predicted E. coli 
PPIs based on the quaternary threading alignments, where 6771 of them were found 
to have a high confidence score that corresponds to the correct fold of the
complexes with a TM-score >0.5, and 39 showed a close consistency with the later 
released experimental structures with an average TM-score = 0.73. These results
demonstrated the significant usefulness of threading-based homologous modeling in
both genome-wide PPI network detection and complex structural construction.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944 
PMID: 33741411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.


2. PLoS Genet. 2020 Jul 27;16(7):e1008610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

IgaA negatively regulates the Rcs Phosphorelay via contact with the RcsD
Phosphotransfer Protein.

Wall EA(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Two-component systems and phosphorelays play central roles in the ability of
bacteria to rapidly respond to changing environments. In E. coli and related
enterobacteria, the complex Rcs phosphorelay is a critical player in the
bacterial response to antimicrobial peptides, beta-lactam antibiotics, and other 
disruptions at the cell surface. The Rcs system is unusual in that an inner
membrane protein, IgaA, is essential due to its negative regulation of the
RcsC/RcsD/RcsB phosphorelay. While it is known that IgaA transduces signals from 
the outer membrane lipoprotein RcsF, how it interacts with the phosphorelay has
remained unknown. Here we performed in vivo interaction assays and genetic
dissection of the critical proteins and found that IgaA interacts with the
phosphorelay protein RcsD, and that this interaction is necessary for regulation.
Interactions between IgaA and RcsD within their respective periplasmic domains of
these two proteins anchor repression of signaling. However, the signaling
response depends on a second interaction between cytoplasmic loop 1 of IgaA and a
truncated Per-Arndt-Sim (PAS-like) domain in RcsD. A single point mutation in the
PAS-like domain increased interactions between the two proteins and blocked
induction of the phosphorelay. IgaA may regulate RcsC, the histidine kinase that 
initiates phosphotransfer through the phosphorelay, indirectly, via its contacts 
with RcsD. Unlike RcsD, and unlike many other histidine kinases, the periplasmic 
domain of RcsC is dispensable for the response to signals that induce the Rcs
phosphorelay system. The multiple contacts between IgaA and RcsD constitute a
poised sensing system, preventing potentially toxic over-activation of this
phosphorelay while enabling it to rapidly and quantitatively respond to signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610 
PMCID: PMC7418988
PMID: 32716926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


3. J Clin Microbiol. 2019 Dec 23;58(1). pii: e01309-19. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01309-19.
Print 2019 Dec 23.

Origin and Evolution of Hybrid Shiga Toxin-Producing and Uropathogenic
Escherichia coli Strains of Sequence Type 141.

Gati NS(1), Middendorf-Bauchart B(1), Bletz S(1), Dobrindt U(2), Mellmann A(3).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, National Consulting
Laboratory for Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS), Münster, Germany.
(2)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, Microbial
Genome-Plasticity, Münster, Germany.
(3)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, National Consulting
Laboratory for Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS), Münster, Germany
mellmann@uni-muenster.de.

Hybrid Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) and uropathogenic E. coli
(UPEC) strains of multilocus sequence type 141 (ST141) cause both urinary tract
infections and diarrhea in humans and are phylogenetically positioned between
STEC and UPEC strains. We used comparative genomic analysis of 85 temporally and 
spatially diverse ST141 E. coli strains, including 14 STEC/UPEC hybrids,
collected in Germany (n = 13) and the United States (n = 1) to reconstruct their 
molecular evolution. Whole-genome sequencing data showed that 89% of the ST141 E.
coli strains either were STEC/UPEC hybrids or contained a mixture of virulence
genes from other pathotypes. Core genome analysis and ancestral reconstruction
revealed that the ST141 E. coli strains clustered into two lineages that evolved 
from a common ancestor in the mid-19th century. The STEC/UPEC hybrid emerged
∼100 years ago by acquiring an stx prophage, which integrated into previously
unknown insertion site between rcsB and rcsD, followed by the insertion of a
pathogenicity island (PAI) similar to PAI II of UPEC strain 536 (PAI II536-like).
The two variants of PAI II536-like were associated with tRNA genes leuX and pheU,
respectively. Finally, microevolution within PAI II536-like and acquisition of
the enterohemorrhagic E. coli plasmid were observed. Our data suggest that
intestinal pathogenic E. coli (IPEC)/extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC)
hybrids are widespread and that selection pressure within the ST141 E. coli
population led to the emergence of the STEC/UPEC hybrid as a clinically important
subgroup. We hypothesize that ST141 E. coli strains serve as a melting pot for
pathogroup conversion between IPEC and ExPEC, contrasting the classical theory of
pathogen emergence from nonpathogens and corroborating our recent phenomenon of
heteropathogenicity among pathogenic E. coli strains.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01309-19 
PMCID: PMC6935910
PMID: 31619530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 9;13(11):e0207181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207181.
eCollection 2018.

Reassessing the role of the Escherichia coli CpxAR system in sensing surface
contact.

Kimkes TEP(1), Heinemann M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Biology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

For proper biofilm formation, bacteria must have mechanisms in place to sense
adhesion to surfaces. In Escherichia coli, the CpxAR and RcsCDB systems have been
reported to sense surfaces. The CpxAR system is widely considered to be
responsible for sensing attachment, specifically to hydrophobic surfaces. Here,
using both single-cell and population-level analyses, we confirm RcsCDB
activation upon surface contact, but find that the CpxAR system is not activated,
in contrast to what had earlier been reported. Thus, the role of CpxAR in surface
sensing and initiation of biofilm formation should be reconsidered.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207181 
PMCID: PMC6226299
PMID: 30412611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


5. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2018 Sep 8;72:111-139. doi:
10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640. Epub 2018 Jun 13.

The Complex Rcs Regulatory Cascade.

Wall E(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; emails: erin.wall@nih.gov ,
majdalan@mail.nih.gov , gottesms@mail.nih.gov.

RcsB, a response regulator of the FixJ/NarL family, is at the center of a complex
network of regulatory inputs and outputs. Cell surface stress is sensed by an
outer membrane lipoprotein, RcsF, which regulates interactions of the inner
membrane protein IgaA, lifting negative regulation of a phosphorelay. In vivo
evidence supports a pathway in which histidine kinase RcsC transfers phosphate to
phosphotransfer protein RcsD, resulting in phosphorylation of RcsB. RcsB acts
either alone or in combination with RcsA to positively regulate capsule synthesis
and synthesis of small RNA (sRNA) RprA as well as other genes, and to negatively 
regulate motility. RcsB in combination with other FixJ/NarL auxiliary proteins
regulates yet other functions, independent of RcsB phosphorylation. Proper
expression of Rcs and its targets is critical for success of Escherichia coli
commensal strains, for proper development of biofilm, and for virulence in some
pathogens. New understanding of how the Rcs phosphorelay works provides insight
into the flexibility of the two-component system paradigm.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640 
PMID: 29897834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2016 May 13;198(11):1576-1584. doi: 10.1128/JB.00094-16. Print 2016 
Jun 1.

Effects of Lipopolysaccharide Core Sugar Deficiency on Colanic Acid Biosynthesis 
in Escherichia coli.

Ren G(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Li Y(1), Hu X(1), Wang X(3)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China xwang@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(4)Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, China.

When 10 Escherichia coli mutant strains with defects in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
core biosynthesis were grown on agar medium at 30°C, four of them, the ΔwaaF,
ΔwaaG, ΔwaaP, and ΔwaaB strains, formed mucoid colonies, while the other six, the
ΔwaaU, ΔwaaR, ΔwaaO, ΔwaaC, ΔwaaQ, and ΔwaaY strains, did not. Using light
microscopy with tannin mordant staining, the presence of exopolysaccharide around
the cells of the mutants that formed mucoid colonies could be discerned. The
ΔwaaF mutant produced the largest amounts of exopolysaccharide, regardless of
whether it was grown on agar or in liquid medium. The exopolysaccharide was
isolated from the liquid growth medium of ΔwaaF cells, hydrolyzed, and analyzed
by high-performance liquid chromatography with an ion-exchange column, and the
results indicated that the exopolysaccharide was consistent with colanic acid.
When the key genes related to the biosynthesis of colanic acid, i.e., wza, wzb,
wzc, and wcaA, were deleted in the ΔwaaF background, the exopolysaccharide could 
not be produced any more, further confirming that it was colanic acid. Colanic
acid could not be produced in strains in which rcsA, rcsB, rcsD, or rcsF was
deleted in the ΔwaaF background, but a reduced level of colanic acid production
was detected when the rcsC gene was deleted, suggesting that a change of
lipopolysaccharide structure in ΔwaaF cells might be sensed by the RcsCDB
phosphorelay system, leading to the production of colanic acid. The results
demonstrate that E. coli cells can activate colanic acid production through the
RcsCDB phosphorelay system in response to a structural deficiency of
lipopolysaccharide.IMPORTANCE: Lipopolysaccharide and colanic acid are important 
forms of exopolysaccharide for Escherichia coli cells. Their metabolism and
biological significance have been investigated, but their interrelation with the 
cell stress response process is not understood. This study demonstrates, for the 
first time, that E. coli cells can activate colanic acid production through the
RcsCDB phosphorelay system in response to a structural change of
lipopolysaccharide, suggesting that bacterial cells can monitor the outer
membrane integrity, which is essential for cell survival and damage repair.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00094-16 
PMCID: PMC4959291
PMID: 27002133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2015 Apr;161(Pt 4):903-13. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000050.
Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Deletion analysis of RcsC reveals a novel signalling pathway controlling
poly-N-acetylglucosamine synthesis and biofilm formation in Escherichia coli.

Oropeza R(1), Salgado-Bravo R(2), Calva E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico oropeza@ibt.unam.mx.
(2)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico.

RcsC is a hybrid histidine kinase that forms part of a phospho-relay signal
transduction pathway with RcsD and RcsB. Besides the typical domains of a sensor 
kinase, i.e. the periplasmic (P), linker (L), dimerization and H-containing (A), 
and ATP-binding (B) domains, RcsC possesses a receiver domain (D) at the
carboxy-terminal domain. To study the role played by each of the RcsC domains,
four plasmids containing several of these domains were constructed (PLAB, LAB, AB
and ABD) and transformed into Escherichia coli K-12 strain BW25113. Different
amounts of biofilm were produced, depending on the RcsC domains expressed: the
plasmid expressing the ABD subdomains produced the highest amount of biofilm.
This phenotype was also observed when the plasmids were transformed in a ΔrcsCDB 
strain. Biofilm formation was abolished in the pgaABCD and nhaR backgrounds. The 
results indicate the existence of a novel signalling pathway that depends on
RcsC, yet independent of RcsD and RcsB, that activates the pgaABCD operon and, as
a consequence, biofilm formation. This signalling pathway involves the secondary 
metabolite acetyl phosphate and the response regulator OmpR.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000050 
PMID: 25667010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(14):3708-22. doi: 10.1128/JB.00361-12. Epub 2012 May
11.

Salmonella biofilm development depends on the phosphorylation status of RcsB.

Latasa C(1), García B, Echeverz M, Toledo-Arana A, Valle J, Campoy S, García-del 
Portillo F, Solano C, Lasa I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología, Idab, Universidad Pública de
Navarra-CSIC-Gobierno de Navarra, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain.

The Rcs phosphorelay pathway is a complex signaling pathway involved in the
regulation of many cell surface structures in enteric bacteria. In response to
environmental stimuli, the sensor histidine kinase (RcsC) autophosphorylates and 
then transfers the phosphate through intermediary steps to the response regulator
(RcsB), which, once phosphorylated, regulates gene expression. Here, we show that
Salmonella biofilm development depends on the phosphorylation status of RcsB.
Thus, unphosphorylated RcsB, hitherto assumed to be inactive, is essential to
activate the expression of the biofilm matrix compounds. The prevention of RcsB
phosphorylation either by the disruption of the phosphorelay at the RcsC or RcsD 
level or by the production of a nonphosphorylatable RcsB allele induces biofilm
development. On the contrary, the phosphorylation of RcsB by the constitutive
activation of the Rcs pathway inhibits biofilm development, an effect that can be
counteracted by the introduction of a nonphosphorylatable RcsB allele. The
inhibition of biofilm development by phosphorylated RcsB is due to the repression
of CsgD expression, through a mechanism dependent on the accumulation of the
small noncoding RNA RprA. Our results indicate that unphosphorylated RcsB plays
an active role for integrating environmental signals and, more broadly, that RcsB
phosphorylation acts as a key switch between planktonic and sessile life-styles
in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00361-12 
PMCID: PMC3393492
PMID: 22582278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(13):3475-85. doi: 10.1128/JB.06596-11. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

The response regulator RcsB activates expression of Mat fimbriae in meningitic
Escherichia coli.

Lehti TA(1), Heikkinen J, Korhonen TK, Westerlund-Wikström B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Microbiology, Department of Biosciences, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The common colonization factor of Escherichia coli, the Mat (also termed ECP)
fimbria, functions to advance biofilm formation on inert surfaces as well as
bacterial adherence to epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. We used
global mini-Tn5 transposon mutagenesis to identify novel regulators of biofilm
formation by the meningitic E. coli isolate IHE 3034. Of the 4,418 transformants,
we found 17 that were impaired in biofilm formation. Most of these mutants were
affected in lipopolysaccharide synthesis and were reduced in growth but not in
Mat fimbria expression. In contrast, two mutants grew well but did not express
Mat fimbria. The insertions in these two mutants were located at different sites 
of the rcsB gene, which encodes a DNA-binding response regulator of the Rcs
response regulon. The mutations abrogated temperature-dependent biofilm formation
by IHE 3034, and the phenotype correlated with loss of mat expression. The defect
in biofilm formation in the rcsB mutant was reversed upon complementation with
rcsB as well as by overexpression of structural mat genes but not by
overexpression of the fimbria-specific activator gene matA. Monitoring of the mat
operon promoter activity with chromosomal reporter fusions showed that the RcsB
protein and an RcsAB box in the mat regulatory region, but not RcsC, RcsD, AckA, 
and Pta, are essential for initiation of mat transcription. Gel retardation
assays showed that RcsB specifically binds to the mat promoter DNA, which enables
its function in promoting biofilm formation by E. coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.06596-11 
PMCID: PMC3434760
PMID: 22522901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Structure. 2011 Apr 13;19(4):577-87. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2011.01.012.

Structural insights into Rcs phosphotransfer: the newly identified RcsD-ABL
domain enhances interaction with the response regulator RcsB.

Schmöe K(1), Rogov VV, Rogova NY, Löhr F, Güntert P, Bernhard F, Dötsch V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, 60438 Frankfurt/Main,
Germany.

The Rcs-signaling system is one of the most remarkable phosphorelay pathways in
Enterobacteriaceae, comprising several membrane-bound and soluble proteins.
Within the complex phosphotransfer pathway, the histidine phosphotransferase
(HPt) domain of the RcsD membrane-bound component serves as a crucial factor in
modulating the phosphorylation state of the transcription factor RcsB. We have
identified a new domain, RcsD-ABL, located N terminally to RcsD-HPt that
interacts with RcsB as well. We have determined its structure, characterized its 
interaction interface with RcsB, and built a structural model of the complex of
the RcsD-ABL domain with RcsB. Our results indicate that the effector domain of
RcsB, which normally binds to DNA, is recognized by RcsD-ABL, whereas the HPt
domain interacts with the phosphoreceiver domain of RcsB.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2011.01.012 
PMID: 21481780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplJ) AND (rplJ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jul 7;45(12):7285-7298. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx454.

Genome-wide mRNA processing in methanogenic archaea reveals post-transcriptional 
regulation of ribosomal protein synthesis.

Qi L(1)(2), Yue L(1)(2), Feng D(1), Qi F(3), Li J(1), Dong X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing
100101, PR China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Shijingshan
District, Beijing 100049, PR China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Unlike stable RNAs that require processing for maturation, prokaryotic cellular
mRNAs generally follow an 'all-or-none' pattern. Herein, we used a 5΄
monophosphate transcript sequencing (5΄P-seq) that specifically captured the
5΄-end of processed transcripts and mapped the genome-wide RNA processing sites
(PSSs) in a methanogenic archaeon. Following statistical analysis and stringent
filtration, we identified 1429 PSSs, among which 23.5% and 5.4% were located in
5΄ untranslated region (uPSS) and intergenic region (iPSS), respectively. A
predominant uridine downstream PSSs served as a processing signature. Remarkably,
5΄P-seq detected overrepresented uPSS and iPSS in the polycistronic operons
encoding ribosomal proteins, and the majority upstream and proximal ribosome
binding sites, suggesting a regulatory role of processing on translation
initiation. The processed transcripts showed increased stability and translation 
efficiency. Particularly, processing within the tricistronic transcript of
rplA-rplJ-rplL enhanced the translation of rplL, which can provide a driving
force for the 1:4 stoichiometry of L10 to L12 in the ribosome. Growth-associated 
mRNA processing intensities were also correlated with the cellular ribosomal
protein levels, thereby suggesting that mRNA processing is involved in tuning
growth-dependent ribosome synthesis. In conclusion, our findings suggest that
mRNA processing-mediated post-transcriptional regulation is a potential mechanism
of ribosomal protein synthesis and stoichiometry.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx454 
PMCID: PMC5499594
PMID: 28520982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 14;5(7):e11575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575.

Measurement of the rates of synthesis of three components of ribosomes of
Mycobacterium fortuitum: a theoretical approach to qRT-PCR experimentation.

Garcia MJ(1), Nuñez MC, Cox RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Preventiva, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Autónoma, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Except for the ribosomal protein L12 (rplL), ribosomal proteins are
present as one copy per ribosome; L12 (rplL) is unusual because it is present as 
four copies per ribosome. Thus, the strategies used by Mycobacterium fortuitum to
regulate ribosomal protein synthesis were investigated, including evaluations of 
the rates of chain elongations of 16S rRNA, rplL and ribosomal protein S12
(rpsL).
METHODOLOGY: RNA was isolated from cell cultures and cDNA was prepared. The
numbers of cDNA copies of 16S rRNA, precursor-16S rRNA and transcripts of rpsL
and rplL were quantified by qRT-PCR and then related to the rates of 16S rRNA,
rpsL and rplL chain elongations by means of a mathematical framework for coupled 
transcription/translation.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The rates of synthesis of 16S rRNA, rpsL and rplL
respectively were found to be approximately 50 x 10(3) nucleotides h(-1), 1.6 x
10(3) amino acid residues h(-1) and 3.4 x 10(3) amino acid residues h(-1). The
number of transcripts of rplL was approximately twice that of rpsL. These data
account for the presence of one copy of rpsL and four copies of rplL per
ribosome, and reveal that the rate of M. fortuitum ribosome synthesis was closer 
to that of M. tuberculosis than to E. coli. Except for rplJ, the elongation rate 
obtained for rpsL was inferred to be appropriate for all other proteins present
as one copy per ribosome.
SIGNIFICANCE: The results obtained provide the basis for a comprehensive view of 
the kinetics of ribosome synthesis, and of the ways that bacterial cells utilize 
genes encoding ribosomal proteins. The methodology also applies to proteins
involved in transcription, energy generation and to bacterial proteins in
general. The method proposed for measuring the fidelity of cDNA preparations is
intrinsically much more sensitive than procedures that measure the integrity of
16S rRNA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575 
PMCID: PMC2904383
PMID: 20644643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007;13(1-3):55-64.

Identification of a ribosomal L10-like protein from Flavobacterium psychrophilum 
as a recombinant vaccine candidate for rainbow trout fry syndrome.

Crump EM(1), Burian J, Allen PD, Gale S, Kay WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
B.C., Canada.

The psychrophilic bacterium Flavobacterium psychrophilum is a rapidly emerging,
virulent pathogen of a variety of commercially important finfish species,
including salmonids. No vaccines against F. psychrophilum are currently
available, partly due to its recalcitrant growth in vitro. Consequently, we
explored the possibility of constructing recombinant vaccines in Escherichia coli
as a prophylactic biotechnological strategy to counter F. psychrophilum
infections. An immunoreactive clone from a F. psychrophilum expression library
was found to express a approximately 16 kDa protein antigen. A proteomics
approach was taken to identify the ORF encoding the approximately 16 kDa protein.
Tryptic fragments of the approximately 16 kDa protein were analyzed by MALDI-TOF 
mass spectrometry and compared to theoretical (in silico) tryptic fragments of
translated ORFs predicted within the cloned DNA. The target protein was
identified as a 166 amino acid protein (named 7-166) with homology to rplJ which 
encodes bacterial ribosomal protein L10. Whenhighly expressed in E. coli as an
N-terminal fusion protein, this chimera reacted with convalescent rainbow trout
serum. When adjuvanted and administered intraperitoneally to immature rainbow
trout a high level of protection (82% RPS) was afforded against virulent F.
psychrophilum challenge; thus establishing F. psychrophilumrplJ homologue 7-166
as a promising vaccine candidate for RTFS.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000103597 
PMID: 17693713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Jan 26;1517(2):243-9.

Identification of a growth phase-dependent promoter in the rplJL operon of
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2).

Blanco G(1), Sánchez C, Rodicio MR, Méndez C, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo,
Spain.

A single promoter, rplJp (P(L10)), has been identified in the rplJL operon from
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) by promoter probe and primer extension analyses.
P(L10) is located upstream of the rplL gene and of the DNA encoding the mRNA
leader region that contains the putative L10 (or L10.L12(4)) binding site for
translational autogenous regulation. The potential start point for transcription 
was found 239 nucleotides upstream of the predicted translational start codon of 
rplJ. The promoter sequence shows -35 and -10 hexamers that resemble those of
Streptomyces consensus Escherichia coli sigma(70)-like promoters and the rplJp
from Streptomyces griseus. The amount of the transcript detected by primer
extension analysis decreases during growth immediately after the transition
phase, a slowdown in growth occurring during exponential phase associated with
increases in ppGpp level. The temporal pattern of transcripts shows a clear
correlation with the temporal pattern of L10 and L7/L12 protein synthesis
reported in previous kinetic studies. This indicates that P(L10) is a growth
phase-dependent promoter which may contribute, together with translational
regulation, to the decrease in the synthesis of L10 and L7/L12 observed in liquid
minimal medium. This is supported by results of promoter probe experiments.
Although no significant promoter activity has been found by promoter probing in
the rplJ and rplL intergenic region, an additional 5'-transcript end was detected
by primer extension, probably as a result of mRNA processing event from a longer 
transcript. This may be required to maintain the 1:4 ratio observed for L10 and
L7/L12 in the ribosomes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(00)00280-3 
PMID: 11342105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biophys Chem. 1998 Oct 5;75(1):21-32.

Guanosine tetraphosphate-induced dissociation of open complexes at the
Escherichia coli ribosomal protein promoters rplJ and rpsA P1: nanosecond
depolarization spectroscopic studies.

Raghavan A(1), Chatterji D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

We have measured the fluorescence anisotropy decays of various transcription
complexes formed between Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) and the rplJ,
rpsA P1 and lacUV5 promoters, where the sigma 70-subunit of RNAP is covalently
labeled with the fluorescent probe 1,5-IAEDANS. The observed changes in the
rotational correlation times (phi r) of the sigma 70-bound probe upon ppGpp or
NTP addition to preformed open complexes, were used to directly infer the extent 
of association of the sigma-subunit with these transcription complexes. At the
rplJ and rpsA P1 promoters, the addition of ppGpp (in the absence of heparin and 
nucleotides), results in the dissociation of RNAP from the binary complex. This
is either accompanied by, or leads to the dissociation of a fraction of the
holoenzyme-bound sigma 70. At the lacUV5 promoter, only a marginal dissociation
of RNAP is observed. We propose a model where two types of ppGpp-bound RNAP
interact with the ribosomal protein promoters. One is transcription-competent and
releases sigma 70 upon elongation, while the other dissociates from the open
complex. A fraction of the latter species releases the sigma 70 subunit and is
unable to form a transcription-competent holoenzyme. Our data supports the
mechanism of open complex-destabilization at stringent promoters by ppGpp.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-4622(98)00186-0 
PMID: 9810686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biophys Chem. 1998 Oct 5;75(1):7-19.

The differential effects of guanosine tetraphosphate on open complex formation at
the Escherichia coli ribosomal protein promoters rplJ and rpsA P1.

Raghavan A(1), Kameshwari DB, Chatterji D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

The effects of guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) on inhibition of single-round in 
vitro transcription and on the kinetics of open complex formation were
investigated at the Escherichia coli ribosomal protein promoters rplJ and rpsA
P1. The two promoters differ in their saturation characteristics and
sensitivities to ppGpp. With a 10:1 molar ratio of RNA polymerase (RNAP) to DNA, 
saturation of transcription activity and weak inhibition (approximately 30%) are 
observed at rplJ, in contrast to the weak activity and strong inhibition
(approximately 80%) at rpsA P1. In the absence of ppGpp, the two promoters show a
threefold difference in the overall rate constants of association (ka) (6.5 x
10(7) M-1 s-1 at rplJ and 2.0 x 10(7) M-1 s-1 at rpsA P1), while the dissociation
rate constants (kd) are similar (approximately 4.8 x 10(-5) s-1). The addition of
ppGpp causes a twofold reduction in k2 (isomerisation constant) rplJ and a
threefold decrease in KB (equilibrium constant of RNAP binding) at rpsA P1. There
is a significant twofold increase in kd at rplJ, compared with smaller changes at
rpsA P1 and at the non-stringent lacUV5 promoter. These results indicate that
ppGpp affects the formation and stability of the open complex at the rplJ
promoter, in contrast to the inhibition of RNAP binding to the rpsA P1 promoter.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-4622(98)00185-9 
PMID: 9810685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Gene. 1997 Feb 28;186(2):227-35.

Molecular cloning and characterization of Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB.

Alekshun M(1), Kashlev M, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla 10595, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB, the gene encoding the beta-subunit of RNA polymerase, 
has been cloned and sequenced. The full-length gene encodes a protein of 1154
amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 129.8 kDa. The amino-acid
sequence is 49% identical to the corresponding protein from Escherichia coli. B. 
burgdorferi rpoB is a component of a gene cluster, which includes rplJ, rplL and 
rpoC. A temperature-sensitive E. coli rpoB mutant could be complemented by
introduction of the B. burgdorferi gene, indicating that the B. burgdorferi rpoB 
is expressed in E. coli and the beta-subunit can be assembled into functional
holoenzyme. The wild-type amino-acid sequence of the B. burgdorferi beta-subunit 
is consistent with those of spontaneously arising rifampicin-resistant mutants of
E. coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis at certain critical residues. This
suggests that the natural resistance of B. burgdorferi to rifampicin may be due
to the primary amino-acid sequence of its beta-subunit.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00714-7 
PMID: 9074501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Microbiol. 1994 May;12(3):375-85.

Synthesis of ribosomal proteins during growth of Streptomyces coelicolor.

Blanco G(1), Rodicio MR, Puglia AM, Méndez C, Thompson CJ, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, Spain.

Changes in expression of ribosomal protein genes during growth and stationary
phase of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) in liquid medium were studied. Proteins
being synthesized were pulse-labelled with [35S]-methionine, separated by
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and quantified using the
BioImage computer software. Most of the ribosomal proteins were synthesized
throughout the life cycle. Exceptions were two proteins whose synthesis
drastically decreased at the approach of stationary phase. These two proteins
were identified in purified ribosomes as homologues of Escherichia coli ribosomal
proteins L10 and L7/L12, using antibodies raised against fusion proteins between 
these ribosomal proteins and Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase. The genes (rplJ
and rplL) encoding the L10 and L7/L12 proteins were contained in a 1.2 kb BamHI
fragment that was cloned and sequenced. The linkage and order of the genes
coincide with other L10-L7/L12 operons. However, L11 and L1 genes were not
present immediately upstream of the L10 gene, as is the case for E. coli and
other bacteria. Instead, two open reading frames of unknown function were found
immediately upstream of the L10 gene, in an adjacent 1.9 kb BamHI fragment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1994.tb01027.x 
PMID: 7545948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Gene. 1994 Mar 11;140(1):137-8.

Sequences of the rplJL operon containing the L10 and L7/L12 genes from Brucella
abortus.

Oliveira SC(1), Zhu Y, Splitter G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison 53706.

The rplJL operon encodes the L10 and L7/L12 proteins, essential for ribosomal
function and protein synthesis. In this study, we report the nucleotide sequence 
of the rplJ and rplL genes from Brucella abortus. The deduced amino-acid
sequences show 37 and 67% identity to Escherichia coli L10 and L7/L12,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90744-7 
PMID: 8125331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Mol Biol. 1991 Mar 5;218(1):23-31.

In vivo analysis of overlapping transcription units in the rplKAJLrpoBC ribosomal
protein-RNA polymerase gene cluster of Escherichia coli.

Steward KL(1), Linn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Transcription of the rplKAJLrpoBC ribosomal protein (rpl) RNA polymerase (rpo)
gene cluster is governed by a complex set of signals. To dissect the
transcription units active in vivo and to quantify the relative contribution of
each, an extensive array of rplKAJLrpoB/lacZ gene fusions were constructed on
lambda phage derivatives and introduced in single copy into the chromosomes of
lac- cells. Measurements of beta-galactosidase production from fusions containing
wild-type and/or mutagenized rplrpo DNA fragments permitted the establishment of 
high-resolution transcription profiles of the gene cluster. The results show that
transcription initiated at the upstream rplKp promoter (located just before rplK)
does not terminate before the rplJp promoter (located upstream from rplJ), but
instead reads through into the distal genes. In addition, rplJp continues to
function efficiently in the presence of readthrough transcription from rplKp. As 
a result the rplJL genes are transcribed at almost twice the frequency of the
upstream rplKA genes. However, the transcription of rpoB, which is situated
downstream from the previously identified attenuator (rpoBa), is only marginally 
increased (20%) when both promoters are present. This suggests that although both
transcription units overlap, transcriptional termination at rpoBa is modulated in
response to the frequency of initiation from both promoters.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90870-c 
PMID: 1825852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplJ) AND (rplL)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jul 7;45(12):7285-7298. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx454.

Genome-wide mRNA processing in methanogenic archaea reveals post-transcriptional 
regulation of ribosomal protein synthesis.

Qi L(1)(2), Yue L(1)(2), Feng D(1), Qi F(3), Li J(1), Dong X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing
100101, PR China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Shijingshan
District, Beijing 100049, PR China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Unlike stable RNAs that require processing for maturation, prokaryotic cellular
mRNAs generally follow an 'all-or-none' pattern. Herein, we used a 5΄
monophosphate transcript sequencing (5΄P-seq) that specifically captured the
5΄-end of processed transcripts and mapped the genome-wide RNA processing sites
(PSSs) in a methanogenic archaeon. Following statistical analysis and stringent
filtration, we identified 1429 PSSs, among which 23.5% and 5.4% were located in
5΄ untranslated region (uPSS) and intergenic region (iPSS), respectively. A
predominant uridine downstream PSSs served as a processing signature. Remarkably,
5΄P-seq detected overrepresented uPSS and iPSS in the polycistronic operons
encoding ribosomal proteins, and the majority upstream and proximal ribosome
binding sites, suggesting a regulatory role of processing on translation
initiation. The processed transcripts showed increased stability and translation 
efficiency. Particularly, processing within the tricistronic transcript of
rplA-rplJ-rplL enhanced the translation of rplL, which can provide a driving
force for the 1:4 stoichiometry of L10 to L12 in the ribosome. Growth-associated 
mRNA processing intensities were also correlated with the cellular ribosomal
protein levels, thereby suggesting that mRNA processing is involved in tuning
growth-dependent ribosome synthesis. In conclusion, our findings suggest that
mRNA processing-mediated post-transcriptional regulation is a potential mechanism
of ribosomal protein synthesis and stoichiometry.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx454 
PMCID: PMC5499594
PMID: 28520982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 14;5(7):e11575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575.

Measurement of the rates of synthesis of three components of ribosomes of
Mycobacterium fortuitum: a theoretical approach to qRT-PCR experimentation.

Garcia MJ(1), Nuñez MC, Cox RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Preventiva, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Autónoma, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Except for the ribosomal protein L12 (rplL), ribosomal proteins are
present as one copy per ribosome; L12 (rplL) is unusual because it is present as 
four copies per ribosome. Thus, the strategies used by Mycobacterium fortuitum to
regulate ribosomal protein synthesis were investigated, including evaluations of 
the rates of chain elongations of 16S rRNA, rplL and ribosomal protein S12
(rpsL).
METHODOLOGY: RNA was isolated from cell cultures and cDNA was prepared. The
numbers of cDNA copies of 16S rRNA, precursor-16S rRNA and transcripts of rpsL
and rplL were quantified by qRT-PCR and then related to the rates of 16S rRNA,
rpsL and rplL chain elongations by means of a mathematical framework for coupled 
transcription/translation.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The rates of synthesis of 16S rRNA, rpsL and rplL
respectively were found to be approximately 50 x 10(3) nucleotides h(-1), 1.6 x
10(3) amino acid residues h(-1) and 3.4 x 10(3) amino acid residues h(-1). The
number of transcripts of rplL was approximately twice that of rpsL. These data
account for the presence of one copy of rpsL and four copies of rplL per
ribosome, and reveal that the rate of M. fortuitum ribosome synthesis was closer 
to that of M. tuberculosis than to E. coli. Except for rplJ, the elongation rate 
obtained for rpsL was inferred to be appropriate for all other proteins present
as one copy per ribosome.
SIGNIFICANCE: The results obtained provide the basis for a comprehensive view of 
the kinetics of ribosome synthesis, and of the ways that bacterial cells utilize 
genes encoding ribosomal proteins. The methodology also applies to proteins
involved in transcription, energy generation and to bacterial proteins in
general. The method proposed for measuring the fidelity of cDNA preparations is
intrinsically much more sensitive than procedures that measure the integrity of
16S rRNA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575 
PMCID: PMC2904383
PMID: 20644643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Jan 26;1517(2):243-9.

Identification of a growth phase-dependent promoter in the rplJL operon of
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2).

Blanco G(1), Sánchez C, Rodicio MR, Méndez C, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo,
Spain.

A single promoter, rplJp (P(L10)), has been identified in the rplJL operon from
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) by promoter probe and primer extension analyses.
P(L10) is located upstream of the rplL gene and of the DNA encoding the mRNA
leader region that contains the putative L10 (or L10.L12(4)) binding site for
translational autogenous regulation. The potential start point for transcription 
was found 239 nucleotides upstream of the predicted translational start codon of 
rplJ. The promoter sequence shows -35 and -10 hexamers that resemble those of
Streptomyces consensus Escherichia coli sigma(70)-like promoters and the rplJp
from Streptomyces griseus. The amount of the transcript detected by primer
extension analysis decreases during growth immediately after the transition
phase, a slowdown in growth occurring during exponential phase associated with
increases in ppGpp level. The temporal pattern of transcripts shows a clear
correlation with the temporal pattern of L10 and L7/L12 protein synthesis
reported in previous kinetic studies. This indicates that P(L10) is a growth
phase-dependent promoter which may contribute, together with translational
regulation, to the decrease in the synthesis of L10 and L7/L12 observed in liquid
minimal medium. This is supported by results of promoter probe experiments.
Although no significant promoter activity has been found by promoter probing in
the rplJ and rplL intergenic region, an additional 5'-transcript end was detected
by primer extension, probably as a result of mRNA processing event from a longer 
transcript. This may be required to maintain the 1:4 ratio observed for L10 and
L7/L12 in the ribosomes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(00)00280-3 
PMID: 11342105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1997 Feb 28;186(2):227-35.

Molecular cloning and characterization of Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB.

Alekshun M(1), Kashlev M, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla 10595, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB, the gene encoding the beta-subunit of RNA polymerase, 
has been cloned and sequenced. The full-length gene encodes a protein of 1154
amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 129.8 kDa. The amino-acid
sequence is 49% identical to the corresponding protein from Escherichia coli. B. 
burgdorferi rpoB is a component of a gene cluster, which includes rplJ, rplL and 
rpoC. A temperature-sensitive E. coli rpoB mutant could be complemented by
introduction of the B. burgdorferi gene, indicating that the B. burgdorferi rpoB 
is expressed in E. coli and the beta-subunit can be assembled into functional
holoenzyme. The wild-type amino-acid sequence of the B. burgdorferi beta-subunit 
is consistent with those of spontaneously arising rifampicin-resistant mutants of
E. coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis at certain critical residues. This
suggests that the natural resistance of B. burgdorferi to rifampicin may be due
to the primary amino-acid sequence of its beta-subunit.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00714-7 
PMID: 9074501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 1994 May;12(3):375-85.

Synthesis of ribosomal proteins during growth of Streptomyces coelicolor.

Blanco G(1), Rodicio MR, Puglia AM, Méndez C, Thompson CJ, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, Spain.

Changes in expression of ribosomal protein genes during growth and stationary
phase of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) in liquid medium were studied. Proteins
being synthesized were pulse-labelled with [35S]-methionine, separated by
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and quantified using the
BioImage computer software. Most of the ribosomal proteins were synthesized
throughout the life cycle. Exceptions were two proteins whose synthesis
drastically decreased at the approach of stationary phase. These two proteins
were identified in purified ribosomes as homologues of Escherichia coli ribosomal
proteins L10 and L7/L12, using antibodies raised against fusion proteins between 
these ribosomal proteins and Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase. The genes (rplJ
and rplL) encoding the L10 and L7/L12 proteins were contained in a 1.2 kb BamHI
fragment that was cloned and sequenced. The linkage and order of the genes
coincide with other L10-L7/L12 operons. However, L11 and L1 genes were not
present immediately upstream of the L10 gene, as is the case for E. coli and
other bacteria. Instead, two open reading frames of unknown function were found
immediately upstream of the L10 gene, in an adjacent 1.9 kb BamHI fragment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1994.tb01027.x 
PMID: 7545948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Gene. 1994 Mar 11;140(1):137-8.

Sequences of the rplJL operon containing the L10 and L7/L12 genes from Brucella
abortus.

Oliveira SC(1), Zhu Y, Splitter G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison 53706.

The rplJL operon encodes the L10 and L7/L12 proteins, essential for ribosomal
function and protein synthesis. In this study, we report the nucleotide sequence 
of the rplJ and rplL genes from Brucella abortus. The deduced amino-acid
sequences show 37 and 67% identity to Escherichia coli L10 and L7/L12,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90744-7 
PMID: 8125331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1990 Jan;172(1):431-6.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L10 is rapidly degraded when synthesized in
excess of ribosomal protein L7/L12.

Petersen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

In Escherichia coli the genes encoding ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/12, rplJ and
rplL, respectively, are cotranscribed and subject to translational coupling.
Synthesis of both proteins is coordinately regulated at the translational level
by binding of L10 or a complex of L10 and L7/L12 to a single target in the mRNA
leader region upstream of rplJ. Unexpectedly, small deletions that inactivated
the ribosome-binding site of the rplL gene carried on multicopy plasmids exerted 
a negative effect on expression of the upstream rplJ gene. This effect could be
overcome by overproduction of L7/L12 in trans from another plasmid. This apparent
stimulation resulted from stabilization of the overproduced L10 protein by
L7/L12, presumably because free L10, in contrast to L10 complexed with L7/L12, is
subject to rapid proteolytic decay. The contribution of this decay mechanism to
the regulation of the rplJL operon is evaluated.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.1.431-436.1990 
PMCID: PMC208449
PMID: 2403546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Biol. 1989 Mar 20;206(2):323-32.

Long-range translational coupling in the rplJL-rpoBC operon of Escherichia coli.

Petersen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

In Escherichia coli the genes encoding ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/L12, rplJ
and rplL, are cotranscribed, and translation of both cistrons is regulated by
binding of L10 or a complex of L10 and L7/L12 to a single target in the mRNA
leader region. Co-ordinated regulation is assured by some kind of translational
coupling, the mechanism of which was investigated here by deletion analysis of
plasmids carrying either the intact rplL gene or rplL-lacZ gene fusions. Unless
the rplL ribosome binding site was modified by deletion, efficient initiation of 
translation required translation of a region located more than 500 nucleotides
upstream on the transcript within the rplJ cistron. It is proposed that the
wild-type rplL ribosome binding site is blocked by long-range RNA base-pairing to
this region, when translation of the rplJ sequence is inhibited.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90482-8 
PMID: 2654402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 1984 Aug;159(2):770-2.

Order of ribosomal protein genes in the Rif cluster of Bacillus subtilis is
identical to that of Escherichia coli.

Dabbs ER.

Mutants of Bacillus subtilis with electrophoretic variants of ribosomal protein
L1, L5, L9, or L11 were used to determine the order of the genes for these
proteins by transformation experiments. The proteins are homologous with
Escherichia coli proteins L1, L10, L12, and L11, respectively; using the gene
locus designations based on this correspondence, we determined the order of the
loci to be cysA-rplK-rplA-rplJ-rplL-rpoB. The order of the last five loci was
identical to that of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.159.2.770-772.1984 
PMCID: PMC215713
PMID: 6430876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 1984 Apr;158(1):279-85.

Relative activities of the transcriptional regulatory sites in the rplKAJLrpoBC
gene cluster of Escherichia coli.

Ralling G, Linn T.

The pattern of transcription of the rplKAJLrpoBC gene cluster of Escherichia coli
appears to be complex. At least four different promoters and a transcriptional
attenuator have been identified. To compare the relative effect of each of the
putative promoters and the attenuator on transcription of these genes, we fused
these regulatory sites to lacZ. These transcriptional fusions were constructed on
lambda transducing phages so a single copy of each could be stably integrated
into the chromosome. The level of beta-galactosidase in a lysogen of each phage
reflects the activity of the transcriptional regulatory site. We find that the
promoters preceding rplK (rplKp) and rplJ (rplJp) are indeed the major promoters 
of this gene cluster. The minor promoter before rplL (rplLp) is much weaker and
contributes little to the transcription of the downstream genes. Under these
conditions, we find no evidence of a promoter (rpoBp) in the rplL-rpoB
intercistronic region. The attenuator (atn) terminates ca. 70% of the transcripts
initiated at the promoters preceding it. Although we cannot rule out that some
transcripts from rplKp may read through into rplJLrpoBC, we find that rplJp alone
is sufficient for high-level expression of these genes.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.158.1.279-285.1984 
PMCID: PMC215409
PMID: 6325390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplM) AND (rplM)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Sep 5;47(15):8193-8206. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz502.

A DEAD-box protein regulates ribosome assembly through control of ribosomal
protein synthesis.

Iost I(1), Jain C(2).

Author information: 
(1)ARNA Laboratory, INSERM U1212, CNRS UMR 5320, Université de Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

DEAD-box proteins (DBPs) comprise a large family of proteins that most commonly
have been identified as regulators of ribosome assembly. The Escherichia coli
DBP, SrmB, represents a model bacterial DBP whose absence impairs formation of
the large ribosomal subunit (LSU). To define the basis for SrmB function,
suppressors of the ribosomal defect of ΔsrmB strains were isolated. The major
class of suppressors was found to map to the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the 
rplM-rpsI operon, which encodes the ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) L13 and S9.
An analysis of protein abundance indicated that both r-proteins are
under-produced in the ΔsrmB strain, but are increased in these suppressors,
implicating r-protein underproduction as the molecular basis for the observed
ribosomal defects. Reduced r-protein synthesis was determined to be caused by
intrinsic transcription termination within the rplM 5' UTR that is abrogated by
SrmB. These results reveal a specific mechanism for DBP regulation of ribosomal
assembly, indirectly mediated through its effects on r-protein expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz502 
PMCID: PMC6736130
PMID: 31188443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2016 Aug 25;198(18):2494-502. doi: 10.1128/JB.00187-16. Print 2016
Sep 15.

Regulation of Ribosomal Protein Operons rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA at
the Transcriptional and Translational Levels.

Aseev LV(1), Koledinskaya LS(1), Boni IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia
irina_boni@ibch.ru.

It is widely assumed that in the best-characterized model bacterium Escherichia
coli, transcription units encoding ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and regulation
of their expression have been already well defined. However, transcription start 
sites for several E. coli r-protein operons have been established only very
recently, so that information concerning the regulation of these operons at the
transcriptional or posttranscriptional level is still missing. This paper
describes for the first time the in vivo regulation of three r-protein operons,
rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA The results demonstrate that transcription of
all three operons is subject to ppGpp/DksA-dependent negative stringent control
under amino acid starvation, in parallel with the rRNA operons. By using
single-copy translational fusions with the chromosomal lacZ gene, we show here
that at the translation level only one of these operons, rplM-rpsI, is regulated 
by the mechanism of autogenous repression involving the 5' untranslated region
(UTR) of the operon mRNA, while rpmB-rpmG and rplU-rpmA are not subject to this
type of regulation. This may imply that translational feedback control is not a
general rule for modulating the expression of E. coli r-protein operons. Finally,
we report that L13, a primary protein in 50S ribosomal subunit assembly, serves
as a repressor of rplM-rpsI expression in vivo, acting at a target within the
rplM translation initiation region. Thus, L13 represents a novel example of
regulatory r-proteins in bacteria.IMPORTANCE: It is important to obtain a deeper 
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms responsible for coordinated and
balanced synthesis of ribosomal components. In this paper, we highlight the major
role of a stringent response in regulating transcription of three previously
unexplored r-protein operons, and we show that only one of them is subject to
feedback regulation at the translational level. Improved knowledge of the
regulatory pathways controlling ribosome biogenesis may promote the development
of novel antibacterial agents.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00187-16 
PMCID: PMC4999927
PMID: 27381917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Biochem. 2002 May;269(9):2403-13.

Systematic search for zinc-binding proteins in Escherichia coli.

Katayama A(1), Tsujii A, Wada A, Nishino T, Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics, Mishima,
Shizuoka, Japan.

A systematic search for Escherichia coli proteins with the zinc-binding activity 
was performed using the assay of radioactive Zn(II) binding to total E. coli
proteins fractionated by two methods of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. A
total of 30-40 radioactive spots were identified, of which 14 have been assigned 
from N-terminal sequencing. In addition to five known zinc-binding proteins, nine
zinc-binding proteins were newly identified including: acetate kinase (AckA),
DnaK, serine hydroxymethyltransferase (GlyA), transketolase isozymes (TktA/TktB),
translation elongation factor Ts (Tsf), ribosomal proteins L2 (RplB), L13 (RplM) 
and one of S15 (RpsO), S16 (RpsP) or S17 (RpsQ). Together with about 20 known
zinc-binding proteins, the total number of zinc-binding proteins in E. coli
increased up to more than 30 species (or more than 3% of about 1000 proteins
expressed under laboratory culture conditions). The specificity and affinity of
zinc-binding were analysed for some of the zinc-binding proteins.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02900.x 
PMID: 11985624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Gen Genet. 1985;198(2):279-82.

Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of the genes for ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI)
and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli.

Isono S, Thamm S, Kitakawa M, Isono K.

The genes for the ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI) and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli
have been cloned into a lambda phage vector termed L47.1. The two genes were
identified by infecting UV-light irradiated cells with the resultant phages and
analyzing the protein products by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Suitable
DNA fragments of the isolate were cloned subsequently into M13 phage vectors and 
their nucleotide sequence was determined by the dideoxy method. It is evident
that the two genes form a transcriptional unit, the rplM gene being
promoter-proximal. There is a typical signal sequence for transcriptional
termination after the rpsI gene. The codon usage pattern in the two genes is
similar to other ribosomal protein genes of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00383007 
PMID: 3884974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 1983 Feb;153(2):709-15.

Escherichia coli kasugamycin dependence arising from mutation at the rpsI locus.

Dabbs ER.

Escherichia coli mutants with alterations in the electrophoretic mobility of
ribosomal protein S9 were used to locate rpsI, the gene for this protein, on the 
linkage map. rpsI was located at about 70 min, roughly halfway between argG and
fabE. It was very close to the gene for ribosomal protein L13, rplM. Another
mutation at the rpsI locus gave rise to a phenotype of kasugamycin dependence and
resistance. In this mutant, dependence on antibiotic came from kasugamycin being 
necessary to slow the rate of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.153.2.709-715.1983 
PMCID: PMC221688
PMID: 6337124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 1982 Feb;149(2):779-82.

The gene for ribosomal protein L13, rplM, is located near argR, at about 70
minutes on the Escherichia coli chromosomal linkage map.

Dabbs ER.

Mutants of Escherichia coli with alterations in the electrophoretic mobility of
ribosomal protein L13 were used to locate rplM, the gene for this protein, on the
chromosomal linkage map. rplM was situated between gltB and argR, at about 70
min.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.149.2.779-782.1982 
PMCID: PMC216573
PMID: 7035437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplM) AND (rpsI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Sep 5;47(15):8193-8206. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz502.

A DEAD-box protein regulates ribosome assembly through control of ribosomal
protein synthesis.

Iost I(1), Jain C(2).

Author information: 
(1)ARNA Laboratory, INSERM U1212, CNRS UMR 5320, Université de Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

DEAD-box proteins (DBPs) comprise a large family of proteins that most commonly
have been identified as regulators of ribosome assembly. The Escherichia coli
DBP, SrmB, represents a model bacterial DBP whose absence impairs formation of
the large ribosomal subunit (LSU). To define the basis for SrmB function,
suppressors of the ribosomal defect of ΔsrmB strains were isolated. The major
class of suppressors was found to map to the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the 
rplM-rpsI operon, which encodes the ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) L13 and S9.
An analysis of protein abundance indicated that both r-proteins are
under-produced in the ΔsrmB strain, but are increased in these suppressors,
implicating r-protein underproduction as the molecular basis for the observed
ribosomal defects. Reduced r-protein synthesis was determined to be caused by
intrinsic transcription termination within the rplM 5' UTR that is abrogated by
SrmB. These results reveal a specific mechanism for DBP regulation of ribosomal
assembly, indirectly mediated through its effects on r-protein expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz502 
PMCID: PMC6736130
PMID: 31188443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2016 Aug 25;198(18):2494-502. doi: 10.1128/JB.00187-16. Print 2016
Sep 15.

Regulation of Ribosomal Protein Operons rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA at
the Transcriptional and Translational Levels.

Aseev LV(1), Koledinskaya LS(1), Boni IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia
irina_boni@ibch.ru.

It is widely assumed that in the best-characterized model bacterium Escherichia
coli, transcription units encoding ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and regulation
of their expression have been already well defined. However, transcription start 
sites for several E. coli r-protein operons have been established only very
recently, so that information concerning the regulation of these operons at the
transcriptional or posttranscriptional level is still missing. This paper
describes for the first time the in vivo regulation of three r-protein operons,
rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA The results demonstrate that transcription of
all three operons is subject to ppGpp/DksA-dependent negative stringent control
under amino acid starvation, in parallel with the rRNA operons. By using
single-copy translational fusions with the chromosomal lacZ gene, we show here
that at the translation level only one of these operons, rplM-rpsI, is regulated 
by the mechanism of autogenous repression involving the 5' untranslated region
(UTR) of the operon mRNA, while rpmB-rpmG and rplU-rpmA are not subject to this
type of regulation. This may imply that translational feedback control is not a
general rule for modulating the expression of E. coli r-protein operons. Finally,
we report that L13, a primary protein in 50S ribosomal subunit assembly, serves
as a repressor of rplM-rpsI expression in vivo, acting at a target within the
rplM translation initiation region. Thus, L13 represents a novel example of
regulatory r-proteins in bacteria.IMPORTANCE: It is important to obtain a deeper 
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms responsible for coordinated and
balanced synthesis of ribosomal components. In this paper, we highlight the major
role of a stringent response in regulating transcription of three previously
unexplored r-protein operons, and we show that only one of them is subject to
feedback regulation at the translational level. Improved knowledge of the
regulatory pathways controlling ribosome biogenesis may promote the development
of novel antibacterial agents.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00187-16 
PMCID: PMC4999927
PMID: 27381917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1985;198(2):279-82.

Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of the genes for ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI)
and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli.

Isono S, Thamm S, Kitakawa M, Isono K.

The genes for the ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI) and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli
have been cloned into a lambda phage vector termed L47.1. The two genes were
identified by infecting UV-light irradiated cells with the resultant phages and
analyzing the protein products by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Suitable
DNA fragments of the isolate were cloned subsequently into M13 phage vectors and 
their nucleotide sequence was determined by the dideoxy method. It is evident
that the two genes form a transcriptional unit, the rplM gene being
promoter-proximal. There is a typical signal sequence for transcriptional
termination after the rpsI gene. The codon usage pattern in the two genes is
similar to other ribosomal protein genes of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00383007 
PMID: 3884974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1983 Feb;153(2):709-15.

Escherichia coli kasugamycin dependence arising from mutation at the rpsI locus.

Dabbs ER.

Escherichia coli mutants with alterations in the electrophoretic mobility of
ribosomal protein S9 were used to locate rpsI, the gene for this protein, on the 
linkage map. rpsI was located at about 70 min, roughly halfway between argG and
fabE. It was very close to the gene for ribosomal protein L13, rplM. Another
mutation at the rpsI locus gave rise to a phenotype of kasugamycin dependence and
resistance. In this mutant, dependence on antibiotic came from kasugamycin being 
necessary to slow the rate of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.153.2.709-715.1983 
PMCID: PMC221688
PMID: 6337124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplS) AND (rplS)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Biochimie. 2016 Sep-Oct;128-129:122-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.07.015. Epub
2016 Jul 28.

Alterations in ribosomal protein L19 that decrease the fidelity of translation.

VanNice J(1), Gregory ST(2), Kamath D(1), O'Connor M(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas
City, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology & Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI, 02912, USA; Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, 02881, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas
City, MO, USA. Electronic address: oconnormi@umkc.edu.

Ribosomal protein L19 is an essential ribosomal protein and is a component of
bridge B8, one of the protein-RNA bridges linking the large and small ribosomal
subunits. Bridge B8 also contributes to the accuracy of translation by affecting 
GTPase activation by ribosome-bound aminoacyl tRNA-EF-Tu•GTP ternary complexes.
Previous work has identified a limited number of accuracy-altering alterations in
protein L19 of Salmonella enterica and Thermus thermophilus. Here, we have
targeted the Escherichia coli rplS gene encoding L19 for mutagenesis and have
screened for mutants with altered levels of miscoding. We have recovered 14
distinct L19 mutants, all of which promote increased stop codon readthrough, but 
do not have major effects on subunit association or cell growth. Examination of
the E. coli 70S ribosome structure indicates that the amino acid substitutions
cluster in three distinct regions of L19 and thereby potentially affect its
interactions with L14 and 16S rRNA.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.07.015 
PMCID: PMC5859582
PMID: 27477481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1840(6):2091-104. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.01.020. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Generating novel recombinant prokaryotic lectins with altered carbohydrate
binding properties through mutagenesis of the PA-IL protein from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Keogh D(1), Thompson R(2), Larragy R(2), McMahon K(1), O'Connell M(1), O'Connor
B(2), Clarke P(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland;
Irish Separation Science Cluster (ISSC), National Centre for Sensor Research
(NCSR), Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland;
Irish Separation Science Cluster (ISSC), National Centre for Sensor Research
(NCSR), Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland. Electronic address:
Paul.Clarke3@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Prokaryotic lectins offer significant advantages over eukaryotic
lectins for the development of enhanced glycoselective tools. Amenability to
recombinant expression in Escherichia coli simplifies their production and
presents opportunities for further genetic manipulation to create novel
recombinant prokaryotic lectins (RPLs) with altered or enhanced carbohydrate
binding properties. This study explored the potential of the α-galactophilic
PA-IL lectin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa for use as a scaffold structure for the 
generation of novel RPLs.
METHOD: Specific amino acid residues in the carbohydrate binding site of a
recombinant PA-IL protein were randomly substituted by site-directed mutagenesis.
The resulting expression clones were then functionally screened to identify
clones expressing rPA-IL proteins with altered carbohydrate binding properties.
RESULTS: This study generated RPLs exhibiting diverse carbohydrate binding
activities including specificity and high affinity for β-linked galactose and
N-acetyl-lactosamine (LacNAc) displayed by N-linked glycans on glycoprotein
targets. Key amino acid substitutions were identified and linked with specific
carbohydrate binding activities. Ultimately, the utility of these novel RPLs for 
glycoprotein analysis and for selective fractionation and isolation of
glycoproteins and their glycoforms was demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: The carbohydrate binding properties of the PA-IL protein can be
significantly altered using site-directed mutagenesis strategies to generate
novel RPLs with diverse carbohydrate binding properties.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The novel RPLs reported would find a broad range of
applications in glycobiology, diagnostics and in the analysis of biotherapeutics.
The ability to readily produce these RPLs in gram quantities could enable them to
find larger scale applications for glycoprotein or biotherapeutic purification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.01.020 
PMID: 24462641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5554-60.

Functional analysis of the ffh-trmD region of the Escherichia coli chromosome by 
using reverse genetics.

Persson BC(1), Bylund GO, Berg DE, Wikström PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

We have analyzed the essentiality or contribution to growth of each of four genes
in the Escherichia coli trmD operon (rpsP, 21K, trmD, and rplS) and of the
flanking genes ffh and 16K by a reverse genetic method. Mutant alleles were
constructed in vitro on plasmids and transferred by recombination to the
corresponding lambda phage clone (lambda 439) and from the phage clone to the E. 
coli chromosome. An ability to obtain recombinants only in cells carrying a
complementing plasmid indicated that the mutated gene was essential, while an
ability to obtain recombinants in plasmid-free cells indicated nonessentiality.
In this way, Ffh, the E. coli homolog to the 54-kDa protein of the signal
recognition particle of mammalian cells, and ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 were 
shown to be essential for viability. A deletion of the second gene, 21K, of the
trmD operon reduced the growth rate of the cells fivefold, indicating that the
wild-type 21-kDa protein is important for viability. A deletion-insertion in the 
same gene resulted in the accumulation of an assembly intermediate of the 50S
ribosomal subunit, as a result of polar effects on the expression of a downstream
gene, rplS, which encodes ribosomal protein L19. This finding suggests that L19, 
previously not considered to be an assembly protein, contributes to the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunits. Strains deleted for the trmD gene, the third gene 
of the operon, encoding the tRNA (m1G37)methyltransferase (or TrmD) showed a
severalfold reduced growth rate. Since such a strain grew much slower than a
strain lacking the tRNA(m(1)G37) methyltransferase activity because of a point
mutation, the TrmD protein might have a second function in the cell. Finally, a
16-kDa protein encoded by the gene located downstream of, and convergently
transcribed to, the trmD operon was found to be nonessential and not to
contribute to growth.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.19.5554-5560.1995 
PMCID: PMC177364
PMID: 7559342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1994 Jul 22;145(1):147-8.

Sequences of the Serratia marcescens rplS and trmD genes.

Jin S(1), Benedik MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical and Biophysical Sciences, University of Houston, TX 
77204-5934.

The trmD and rplS genes from the Serratia marcescens trmD operon are presented.
These genes are about 85% similar to those of Escherichia coli and encode very
nearly identical proteins. However, there are an additional 22 nt around the
beginning of trmD in S. marcescens which in addition uses a GUG start codon.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90339-5 
PMID: 8045416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 1989 Aug 20;208(4):575-86.

Differentially expressed trmD ribosomal protein operon of Escherichia coli is
transcribed as a single polycistronic mRNA species.

Byström AS(1), von Gabain A, Björk GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The trmD operon is a four-cistron operon in which the first and fourth genes
encode ribosomal proteins S16 (rpsP) and L19 (rplS), respectively. The second
gene encodes a 21,000 Mr polypeptide of unknown function and the third gene
(trmD) encodes the enzyme tRNA(m1G37)methyltransferase, which catalyzes the
formation of 1-methylguanosine (m1G) next to the 3' end of the anticodon
(position 37) of some tRNAs in Escherichia coli. Here we show under all
regulatory conditions studied, transcription initiates at one unique site, and
the entire operon is transcribed into one polycistronic mRNA. Between the
promoter and the first gene, rpsP, an attenuator-like structure is found (delta G
= -18 kcal; 1 cal = 4.184 J), followed by four uridine residues. This structure
is functional in vitro, and terminates more than two-thirds of the transcripts.
The different parts of the trmD operon mRNA decay at a uniform rate. The
stability of the trmD mRNA is not reduced with decreasing growth rate, which is
in contrast to what has been found for other ribosomal protein mRNAs.
Furthermore, earlier experiments have shown the existence of differential
expression as well as non-co-ordinate regulation within the operon. Our results
are consistent with the regulation of the trmD operon being due to some
mechanism(s) operating at the post-transcriptional level, and do not involve
differential degradation of different mRNA segments, internal promoters or
internal terminators.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90149-6 
PMID: 2478711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. EMBO J. 1983;2(6):899-905.

The nucleotide sequence of an Escherichia coli operon containing genes for the
tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase, the ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 and a 21-K
polypeptide.

Byström AS, Hjalmarsson KJ, Wikström PM, Björk GR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 4.6-kb SalI-EcoRI DNA fragment including the trmD
operon, located at min 56 on the Escherichia coli K-12 chromosome, has been
determined. The trmD operon encodes four polypeptides: ribosomal protein S16
(rpsP), 21-K polypeptide (unknown function), tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase (trmD)
and ribosomal protein L19 (rplS), in that order. In addition, the 4.6-kb DNA
fragment encodes a 48-K and a 16-K polypeptide of unknown functions which are not
part of the trmD operon. The mol. wt. of tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase determined
from the DNA sequence is 28 424. The probable locations of promoter and
terminator of the trmD operon are suggested. The translational start of the trmD 
gene was deduced from the known NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified 
enzyme. The intercistronic regions in the operon vary from 9 to 40 nucleotides,
supporting the earlier conclusion that the four genes are co-transcribed,
starting at the major promoter in front of the rpsP gene. Since it is known that 
ribosomal proteins are present at 8000 molecules/genome and the
tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase at only approximately 80 molecules/genome in a
glucose minimal culture, some powerful regulatory device must exist in this
operon to maintain this non-coordinate expression. The codon usage of the two
ribosomal protein genes is similar to that of other ribosomal protein genes,
i.e., high preference for the most abundant tRNA isoaccepting species. The trmD
gene has a codon usage typical for a protein made in low amount in accordance
with the low number of tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase molecules found in the cell.


PMCID: PMC555206
PMID: 6357787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Gen Genet. 1978 Oct 24;165(3):247-56.

A transducing lambda phage carrying grpE, a bacterial gene necessary for lambda
DNA replication, and two ribosomal protein genes, rpsP (S16) and rplS (L19).

Saito H, Nakamura Y, Uchida H.

A grpE mutation of Escherichia coli K12, which blocks DNA replication of the
phage lambda (Saito and Uchida, 1977), was mapped at 56 min on the standard
genetic map. A transducing lambda phage, lambdagrpE22, carrying the wild type
allele of the grpE gene was constructed in vitro. Structures of lambdagrpE22 and 
its viable deletion derivatives were determined by electron microscopic analyses 
of appropriate heteroduplexes. Proteins coded by the bacterial DNA incorporated
into the transducing phages were detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.
The results showed that the product of the grpE gene is a weakly acidic protein
of molecular weight 24,000. Structural genes for two ribosomal proteins, rplS
(L19) and rpsP (S16) were also shown to be carried by lambdagrpE22.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00332523 
PMID: 368561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (infC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1578-88. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Ribosomal protein L20 controls expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon
via a transcription attenuation mechanism.

Choonee N(1), Even S, Zig L, Putzer H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9073, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie
Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In contrast to Escherichia coli no molecular mechanism controlling the
biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins has been elucidated in Gram-positive
organisms. Here we show that the expression of the Bacillus subtilis
infC-rpmI-rplT operon encoding translation factor IF3 and the ribosomal proteins 
L35 and L20 is autoregulated by a complex transcription attenuation mechanism. It
implicates a 200-bp leader region upstream of infC which contains two conserved
regulatory elements, one of which can act as a transcription terminator. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches we show that expression of the operon is regulated
at the level of transcription elongation by a change in the structure of the
leader mRNA which depends upon the presence of ribosomal protein L20. L20 binds
to a phylogenetically conserved domain and provokes premature transcription
termination at the leader terminator. Footprint and toeprint experiments support 
a regulatory model involving molecular mimicry between the L20-binding sites on
23S rRNA and the mRNA. Our data suggest that Nomura's model of ribosomal protein 
biosynthesis based on autogenous control and molecular mimicry is also valid in
Gram-positive organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm011 
PMCID: PMC1865079
PMID: 17289755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Gen Genet. 1996 Apr 10;250(6):705-14.

Physiological effects of translation initiation factor IF3 and ribosomal protein 
L20 limitation in Escherichia coli.

Olsson CL(1), Graffe M, Springer M, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616, USA.

To investigate the physiological roles of translation initiation factor IF3 and
ribosomal protein L20 in Escherichia coli, the infC, rpmI and rpIT genes encoding
IF3, L35 and L20, respectively, were placed under the control of lac
promotor/operator sequences. Thus, their expression is dependent upon the amount 
of inducer isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG) in the medium. Lysogenic strains were
constructed with recombinant lambda phages that express either rpmI and rplT or
infC and prmI in trans, thereby allowing depletion of only IF3 or L20 at low IPTG
concentrations. At low cellular concentration of IF3, but not L20, decreases and 
the growth rate slows. Furthermore, ribosomes run off polysomes, indicating that 
IF3 functions during the initiation phase of protein synthesis in vivo. During
slow growth, the ratio of RNA to protein increases rather than decreases as
occurs with control strains, indicating that IF3 limitation disrupts feedback
inhibition of rRNA synthesis. As IF3 levels drop, expression from an
AUU-infC-lacZ fusion increases, whereas expression decreases from an
AUG-infC-lacZ fusion, thereby confirming the model of autogenous regulation of
infC. The effects of L20 limitation are similar; cells grown in low
concentrations of IPTG exhibited a decrease in the rate of growth, a decrease in 
cellular L20 concentration, no change in IF3 concentration, and a small increase 
in the ratio of RNA to protein. In addition, a decrease in 50S subunits and the
appearance of an aberrant ribosome peak at approximately 41-43S is seen. Previous
studies have shown that the L20 protein negatively controls its own gene
expression. Reduction of the cellular concentration of L20 derepresses the
expression of an rplT-lacZ gene fusion, thus confirming autogenous regulation by 
L20.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02172982 
PMID: 8628231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Curr Microbiol. 1995 May;30(5):313-6.

Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in Buchnera aphidicola (endosymbiont of aphids):
cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment containing aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT.

Kolibachuk D(1), Rouhbakhsh D, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis 95616-8665, USA.

A 4.5-kilobase DNA fragment from Buchnera aphidicola, the endosymbiont of the
aphid Schizaphis graminum, was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of homology to 
Escherichia coli, the following genes were found in the order listed:
aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT. AroH corresponds to the E. coli tryptophan-inhibited
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase. Evidence was
presented indicating that this is the sole gene for DAHP synthase in the B.
aphidicola genome. This enzyme initiates the complex branched pathway leading to 
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. The presence of aroH is consistent with past
observations indicating that aphid endosymbionts are able to synthesize
tryptophan for the aphid host. thrS, infC, rpmI, and rplT correspond to genes for
threonine tRNA synthase, initiation factor-3, and large ribosome subunit proteins
L35 and L20, respectively. Sequence comparisons indicate some differences and
similarities between E. coli and B. aphidicola with respect to the possible
regulation of synthesis of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00295507 
PMID: 7766160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1993 May 15;127(1):79-85.

Identification of a putative infC-rpmI-rplT operon flanked by long inverted
repeats in Mycoplasma fermentans (incognitus strain).

Hu WS(1), Wang RY, Shih JW, Lo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases Pathology, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000.

A specific 1542-bp DNA fragment was amplified from Mycoplasma fermentans
(incognitus strain) using a unique 23-nucleotide (nt) synthetic
deoxyribonucleotide (oligo) (5'-TCCAAAAAGTCCGGAATTTGGGG) as the primer pair in
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The 23-nt sequence is part of the 29-bp
terminal inverted repeat (IR) which forms the left potential stem-and-loop (s&l) 
structure of the previously identified M. fermentans insertion-sequence(IS)-like 
genetic element [Hu et al., Gene 93 (1990) 67-72]. The amplified DNA was cloned
and sequenced. A pair of 27-bp IR containing the 23-nt synthetic oligo was
identified at both termini. Between the IR, there are four potential open reading
frames (ORFs) which are arranged adjacent to each other in the order, ORF-1,
ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4, with parts of ORF-1 and ORF-2 overlapping. The deduced
amino acid (aa) sequences of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are 34 to 60% identical to
the translation initiation factor IF3 (encoded by the infC gene), ribosomal
proteins L35 (rpmI gene) and L20 (rplT gene) of Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, respectively. In bacteria, the infC-rpmI-rplT genes are
organized to function as an operon. There are multiple sites with promoter-like
sequences identified upstream from the putative infC gene in the mycoplasma
closely resembling the gene arrangement in the bacterial operon. All three genes 
of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are preceded individually by a strong appropriately
spaced (7 and 10 bp) putative Shine-Dalgarno sequence (5'-AAGGA).(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(93)90619-e 
PMID: 8486291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 1992 Nov 20;228(2):366-86.

Messenger RNA secondary structure and translational coupling in the Escherichia
coli operon encoding translation initiation factor IF3 and the ribosomal
proteins, L35 and L20.

Lesage P(1), Chiaruttini C, Graffe M, Dondon J, Milet M, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The Escherichia coli infC-rpmI-rplT operon encodes translation initiation factor 
IF3 and the ribosomal proteins, L35 and L20, respectively. The expression of the 
last cistron (rplT) has been shown to be negatively regulated at a
post-transcriptional level by its own product, L20, which acts at an internal
operator located within infC. The present work shows that L20 directly represses 
the expression of rpmI, and indirectly that of rplT, via translational coupling
with rpmI. Deletions and an inversion of the coding region of rpmI, suggest an
mRNA secondary structure forming between sequences within rpmI and the
translation initiation site of rplT. To verify the existence of this structure,
detailed analyses were performed using chemical and enzymatic probes. Also,
mutants that uncoupled rplT expression from that of rpmI, were isolated. The
mutations fall at positions that would base-pair in the secondary structure. Our 
model is that L20 binds to its operator within infC and represses the translation
of rpmI. When the rpmI mRNA is not translated, it can base-pair with the
ribosomal binding site of rplT, sequestering it, and abolishing rplT expression. 
If the rpmI mRNA is translated, i.e. covered by ribosomes, the inhibitory
structure cannot form leaving the translation initiation site of rplT free for
ribosomal binding and for full expression. Although translational coupling in
ribosomal protein operons has been suspected to be due to the formation of
secondary structures that sequester internal ribosomal binding sites, this is the
first time that such a structure has been shown to exist.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90827-7 
PMID: 1453449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 May;227(1):60-4.

In vivo transcriptional pattern in the infC operon of Bacillus
stearothermophilus.

Falconi M(1), Brombach M, Gualerzi CO, Pon CL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, University of Camerino, Italy.

By Northern blot and primer extension analyses it was shown that in Bacillus
stearothermophilus the genes infC, rpmI and rplT constitute a single
transcriptional unit; the promoter and the transcriptional start-point used in
vivo were identified and the half-life of the transcript (1.2 min) was
determined. No indication of multiple initiation sites nor of differential
stability of different regions of the transcript was found. The results suggest
that Escherichia coli and B. stearothermophilus have a different pattern of
transcription around the infC gene cluster and that differential translational
efficiency within the infC-rpmI-rplT transcriptional unit accounts for the
different levels of IF3, L35 and L20 expression. The rare AUU initiation codon is
the only strictly conserved element of the several peculiar transcriptional and
translational features found in E. coli infC. Upon changing this codon to AUG, we
found a ca. 30-fold increased expression of B. stearothermophilus infC, which is 
similar to that previously found with E. coli infC (i.e. 40-fold), and provided
evidence that regulation of infC expression through its rare AUU initiation codon
might be a general phenomenon in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00260707 
PMID: 2046659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Mol Biol. 1990 Jun 5;213(3):465-75.

Translated translational operator in Escherichia coli. Auto-regulation in the
infC-rpmI-rplT operon.

Lesage P(1), Truong HN, Graffe M, Dondon J, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The genes coding for translation initiation factor IF3 (infC) and for the
ribosomal proteins L35 (rpmI) and L20 (rplT) are transcribed in that order from a
promoter in front of infC. The last two cistrons of the operon (rpmI and rplT)
can be transcribed from a weak secondary promoter situated within the first
cistron (infC). Previous experiments have shown that the expression of infC, the 
first cistron of the operon, is negatively autoregulated at the translational
level and that the abnormal AUU initiation codon of infC is responsible for the
control. We show that the expression of the last cistron (rplT) is also
autoregulated at the posttranscriptional level. The L20 concentration regulates
the level of rplT expression by acting in trans at a site located within the
first cistron (infC) and thus different from that at which IF3 is known to act.
This regulatory site, several hundred nucleotides upstream from the target gene
(rplT), was identified through deletions, insertions and a point mutation. Thus, 
the expression of the operon is controlled in trans by the products of two
different cistrons acting at two different sites. The localization within an open
reading frame (infC) of a regulatory site acting in cis on the translation of a
downstream gene (rplT) is new and was unforeseen since ribosomes translating
through the regulatory site might be expected to impair either the binding of L20
or the mRNA secondary structure change caused by the binding. The possible
competition between translation of the regions acting in cis and the regulation
of the expression of the target gene is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80208-6 
PMID: 2191140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Aug;218(2):355-7.

Cloning and characterization of a gene cluster from Bacillus stearothermophilus
comprising infC, rpmI and rplT.

Pon CL(1), Brombach M, Thamm S, Gualerzi CO.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt. Wittmann, Berlin.

Using two synthetic deoxyribonucleotide probes encoding segments of the primary
structure of initiation factor IF3 from Bacillus stearothermophilus, we
identified and cloned a segment of DNA which carries the infC gene. As in
Escherichia coli, the infC gene begins with the unusual initiation triplet AUU,
and is followed by the structural genes for ribosomal proteins L35 and L20 (rpmI 
and rplT, respectively).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00331290 
PMID: 2779520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Gene. 1988 Mar 31;63(2):309-20.

Transcriptional patterns for the thrS-infC-rplT operon of Escherichia coli.

Wertheimer SJ(1), Klotsky RA, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

The genes coding for threonyl-tRNA synthetase (thrS), translation initiation
factor 3 (infC) and ribosomal protein L20 (rplT) are clustered in the Escherichia
coli genome. Previous studies had suggested the possibility that the expression
of these genes is coupled. The transcriptional events in this operon have now
been examined by S1 nuclease mapping and promoter fusion studies. The results
indicate that infC-containing mRNAs are initiated from three separate promoters. 
Two of these are located in the protein-coding region of thrS and one, P12, is
the major promoter at all growth rates tested. In addition, there is
co-transcription of thrS and infC from the thrS promoter (PT). A single promoter 
for thrS has been mapped approx. 170 nucleotides upstream from its translation
initiation site. Another promoter has been located within the infC-coding region.
It is separated from the next downstream gene, rplT, by a transcription end
point. However, termination at this region is only 50-70% efficient and
transcripts starting at this promoter can read through into rplT. These findings 
demonstrate that the pattern of transcription in this operon is highly complex
and the mRNA levels for each of the genes is determined by a variety of factors, 
including multiple promoters, co-transcription and readthrough of transcription
termination signals.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90534-3 
PMID: 2838394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Jun;208(1-2):94-100.

The unusual translational initiation codon AUU limits the expression of the infC 
(initiation factor IF3) gene of Escherichia coli.

Brombach M, Pon CL.

The expression of infC, the structural gene for translational initiation factor
IF3, has been studied in different constructs under the control of the lambda PL 
and tac promoters. The amount of synthesized IF3 has been determined by a
quantitative functional test and the levels of IF3-specific mRNA have been
estimated. The synthesis of IF3 is strongly enhanced when the unusual AUU
initiation codon is changed to AUG by site-directed mutagenesis. Removal of the
sequence upstream from the start codon including most of the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence, as well as part of a 10 bp region with potential complementarity to an 
internal region of the 16S rRNA, which is unique to the IF3 mRNA, reduced but did
not completely abolish the high expression of infC obtained after introduction of
the AUG initiation codon. The level of IF3 mRNA was found to be positively
influenced by the presence of the rplT gene in the plasmid downstream from the
infC gene. In vivo accumulation of a large excess of IF3, obtained when the infC 
gene was placed under the control of an incompletely repressed tac promoter, was 
not accompanied by any noticeable adverse phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00330428 
PMID: 3302616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (rplT)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 9;10:2982. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02982. eCollection
2019.

Overexpressed L20 Rescues 50S Ribosomal Subunit Assembly Defects of bipA-Deletion
in Escherichia coli.

Choi E(1), Jeon H(1), Oh JI(1), Hwang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pusan National University, Busan, South Korea.

The BipA (BPI-inducible protein A) protein is highly conserved in a large variety
of bacteria and belongs to the translational GTPases, based on sequential and
structural similarities. Despite its conservation in bacteria, bipA is not
essential for cell growth under normal growth conditions. However, at 20°C,
deletion of bipA causes not only severe growth defects but also several
phenotypic changes such as capsule production, motility, and ribosome assembly,
indicating that it has global regulatory properties. Our recent studies revealed 
that BipA is a novel ribosome-associating GTPase, whose expression is
cold-shock-inducible and involved in the incorporation of the ribosomal protein
(r-protein) L6. However, the precise mechanism of BipA in 50S ribosomal subunit
assembly is not completely understood. In this study, to demonstrate the role of 
BipA in the 50S ribosomal subunit and possibly to find an interplaying
partner(s), a genomic library was constructed and suppressor screening was
conducted. Through screening, we found a suppressor gene, rplT, encoding
r-protein L20, which is assembled at the early stage of ribosome assembly and
negatively regulates its own expression at the translational level. We
demonstrated that the exogenous expression of rplT restored the growth of
bipA-deleted strain at low temperature by partially recovering the defects in
ribosomal RNA processing and ribosome assembly. Our findings suggest that the
function of BipA is pivotal for 50S ribosomal subunit biogenesis at a low
temperature and imply that BipA and L20 may exert coordinated actions for proper 
ribosome assembly under cold-shock conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Choi, Jeon, Oh and Hwang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02982 
PMCID: PMC6962249
PMID: 31998269 


2. ACS Synth Biol. 2017 Jun 16;6(6):1065-1075. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00006. Epub 
2017 Mar 9.

Obtaining a Panel of Cascade Promoter-5'-UTR Complexes in Escherichia coli.

Zhou S(1), Ding R(1), Chen J(1), Du G(1), Li H(1), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, and ‡National Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation
Technology, Jiangnan University , 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.

A promoter is one of the most important and basic tools used to achieve diverse
synthetic biology goals. Escherichia coli is one of the most commonly used model 
organisms in synthetic biology to produce useful target products and establish
complicated regulation networks. During the fine-tuning of metabolic or
regulation networks, the limited number of well-characterized inducible promoters
has made implementing complicated strategies difficult. In this study, 104 native
promoter-5'-UTR complexes (PUTR) from E. coli were screened and characterized
based on a series of RNA-seq data. The strength of the 104 PUTRs varied from
0.007% to 4630% of that of the PBAD promoter in the transcriptional level and
from 0.1% to 137% in the translational level. To further upregulate gene
expression, a series of combinatorial PUTRs and cascade PUTRs were constructed by
integrating strong transcriptional promoters with strong translational 5'-UTRs.
Finally, two combinatorial PUTRs (PssrA-UTRrpsT and PdnaKJ-UTRrpsT) and two
cascade PUTRs (PUTRssrA-PUTRinfC-rplT and PUTRalsRBACE-PUTRinfC-rplT) were
identified as having the highest activity, with expression outputs of 170%, 137%,
409%, and 203% of that of the PBAD promoter, respectively. These engineered PUTRs
are stable for the expression of different genes, such as the red fluorescence
protein gene and the β-galactosidase gene. These results show that the PUTRs
characterized and constructed in this study may be useful as a plug-and-play
synthetic biology toolbox to achieve complicated metabolic engineering goals in
fine-tuning metabolic networks to produce target products.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00006 
PMID: 28252945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr 1;41(6):3491-503. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt055. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Most RNAs regulating ribosomal protein biosynthesis in Escherichia coli are
narrowly distributed to Gammaproteobacteria.

Fu Y(1), Deiorio-Haggar K, Anthony J, Meyer MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Ave. Chestnut Hill, MA
02467, USA.

In Escherichia coli, 12 distinct RNA structures within the transcripts encoding
ribosomal proteins interact with specific ribosomal proteins to allow autogenous 
regulation of expression from large multi-gene operons, thus coordinating
ribosomal protein biosynthesis across multiple operons. However, these RNA
structures are typically not represented in the RNA Families Database or
annotated in genomic sequences databases, and their phylogenetic distribution is 
largely unknown. To investigate the extent to which these RNA structures are
conserved across eubacterial phyla, we created multiple sequence alignments
representing 10 of these messenger RNA (mRNA) structures in E. coli. We find that
while three RNA structures are widely distributed across many phyla of bacteria, 
seven of the RNAs are narrowly distributed to a few orders of
Gammaproteobacteria. To experimentally validate our computational predictions, we
biochemically confirmed dual L1-binding sites identified in many Firmicute
species. This work reveals that RNA-based regulation of ribosomal protein
biosynthesis is used in nearly all eubacterial phyla, but the specific RNA
structures that regulate ribosomal protein biosynthesis in E. coli are narrowly
distributed. These results highlight the limits of our knowledge regarding
ribosomal protein biosynthesis regulation outside of E. coli, and the potential
for alternative RNA structures responsible for regulating ribosomal proteins in
other eubacteria.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt055 
PMCID: PMC3616713
PMID: 23396277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jan 18;375(3):612-25. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

A competition mechanism regulates the translation of the Escherichia coli operon 
encoding ribosomal proteins L35 and L20.

Haentjens-Sitri J(1), Allemand F, Springer M, Chiaruttini C.

Author information: 
(1)UPR9073 du CNRS associée à l'Université de Paris VII, Institut de Biologie
Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein (r-protein) L20 is essential for the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunit and is also a translational regulator of its own
rpmI-rplT operon, encoding r-proteins L35 and L20 in that order. L20 directly
represses the translation of the first cistron and, through translational
coupling, that of its own gene. The translational operator of the operon is 450
nt in length and includes a long-range pseudoknot interaction between two RNA
sequences separated by 280 nt. L20 has the potential to bind both to this
pseudoknot and to an irregular hairpin, although only one site is occupied at a
time during regulation. This work shows that the rpmI-rplT operon is regulated by
competition between L20 and the ribosome for binding to mRNA in vitro and in
vivo. Detailed studies on the regulatory mechanisms of r-protein synthesis have
only been performed on the rpsO gene, regulated by r-protein S15, and on the
alpha operon, regulated by S4. Both are thought to be controlled by a trapping
mechanism, whereby the 30S ribosomal subunit, the mRNA, and the initiator tRNA
are blocked as a nonfunctional preternary complex. This alternative mode of
regulation of the rpmI-rplT operon raises the possibility that control is
kinetically and not thermodynamically limited in this case. We show that the
pseudoknot, which is known to be essential for L20 binding and regulation, also
enhances 30S binding to mRNA as if this structure is specifically recognised by
the ribosome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.10.058 
PMID: 18037435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(9):3016-31. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L20 binds as a single monomer to its own mRNA 
bearing two potential binding sites.

Allemand F(1), Haentjens J, Chiaruttini C, Royer C, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)UPR9073 du CNRS, l'Université de Paris VII, Institut de Biologie
Physico-chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005, Paris, France.

Ribosomal protein L20 is crucial for the assembly of the large ribosomal subunit 
and represses the translation of its own mRNA. L20 mRNA carries two L20-binding
sites, the first folding into a pseudoknot and the second into an imperfect stem 
and loop. These two sites and the L20-binding site on 23S ribosomal RNA are
recognized similarly using a single RNA-binding site located on one face of L20. 
In this work, using gel filtration and fluorescence cross-correlation
spectroscopy (FCCS) experiments, we first exclude the possibility that L20 forms 
a dimer, which would allow each monomer to bind one site of the mRNA. Secondly we
show, using affinity purification and FCCS experiments, that only one molecule of
L20 binds to the L20 mRNA despite the presence of two potential binding sites.
Thirdly, using RNA chemical probing, we show that the two L20-binding sites are
in interaction. This interaction provides an explanation for the single occupancy
of the mRNA. The two interacting sites could form a single hybrid site or the
binding of L20 to a first site may inhibit binding to the second. Models of
regulation compatible with our data are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm197 
PMCID: PMC1888825
PMID: 17439971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1578-88. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Ribosomal protein L20 controls expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon
via a transcription attenuation mechanism.

Choonee N(1), Even S, Zig L, Putzer H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9073, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie
Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In contrast to Escherichia coli no molecular mechanism controlling the
biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins has been elucidated in Gram-positive
organisms. Here we show that the expression of the Bacillus subtilis
infC-rpmI-rplT operon encoding translation factor IF3 and the ribosomal proteins 
L35 and L20 is autoregulated by a complex transcription attenuation mechanism. It
implicates a 200-bp leader region upstream of infC which contains two conserved
regulatory elements, one of which can act as a transcription terminator. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches we show that expression of the operon is regulated
at the level of transcription elongation by a change in the structure of the
leader mRNA which depends upon the presence of ribosomal protein L20. L20 binds
to a phylogenetically conserved domain and provokes premature transcription
termination at the leader terminator. Footprint and toeprint experiments support 
a regulatory model involving molecular mimicry between the L20-binding sites on
23S rRNA and the mRNA. Our data suggest that Nomura's model of ribosomal protein 
biosynthesis based on autogenous control and molecular mimicry is also valid in
Gram-positive organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm011 
PMCID: PMC1865079
PMID: 17289755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Jun;56(6):1441-56.

Double molecular mimicry in Escherichia coli: binding of ribosomal protein L20 to
its two sites in mRNA is similar to its binding to 23S rRNA.

Guillier M(1), Allemand F, Dardel F, Royer CA, Springer M, Chiaruttini C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, CNRS UPR9073, Unité de Régulation de
l'Expression Génétique chez les Microorganismes, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie,
75005 Paris, France.

Escherichia coli ribosomal L20 is one of five proteins essential for the first
reconstitution step of the 50S ribosomal subunit in vitro. It is purely an
assembly protein, because it can be withdrawn from the mature subunit without
effect on ribosome activity. In addition, L20 represses the translation of its
own gene by binding to two sites in its mRNA. The first site is a pseudoknot
formed by a base-pairing interaction between nucleotide sequences separated by
more than 280 nucleotides, whereas the second site is an irregular helix formed
by base-pairing between neighbouring nucleotide sequences. Despite these
differences, the mRNA folds in such a way that both L20 binding sites share
secondary structure similarity with the L20 binding site located at the junction 
between helices H40 and H41 in 23S rRNA. Using a set of genetic, biochemical,
biophysical, and structural experiments, we show here that all three sites are
recognized similarly by L20.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04644.x 
PMID: 15916597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. RNA. 2005 May;11(5):728-38.

The N-terminal extension of Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L20 is important
for ribosome assembly, but dispensable for translational feedback control.

Guillier M(1), Allemand F, Graffe M, Raibaud S, Dardel F, Springer M, Chiaruttini
C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UPR 9073 du CNRS, Unité de Régulation
de l'Expression Génétique chez les Microorganismes, Paris, France.

The Escherichia coli autoregulatory ribosomal protein L20 consists of two
structurally distinct domains. The C-terminal domain is globular and sits on the 
surface of the large ribosomal subunit whereas the N-terminal domain has an
extended shape and penetrates deep into the RNA-rich core of the subunit. Many
other ribosomal proteins have analogous internal or terminal extensions. However,
the biological functions of these extended domains remain obscure. Here we show
that the N-terminal tail of L20 is important for ribosome assembly in vivo.
Indeed, a truncated version of L20 without its N-terminal tail is unable to
complement the deletion of rplT, the gene encoding L20. In addition, this L20
truncation confers a lethal-dominant phenotype, suggesting that the N-terminal
domain is essential for cell growth because it could be required for ribosome
assembly. Supporting this hypothesis, partial deletions of the N-terminal tail of
the protein are shown to cause a slow-growth phenotype due to altered ribosome
assembly in vivo as large amounts of intermediate 40S ribosomal particles
accumulate. In addition to being a ribosomal protein, L20 also acts as an
autogenous repressor. Using L20 truncations, we also show that the N-terminal
tail of L20 is dispensable for autogenous control.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.7134305 
PMCID: PMC1370758
PMID: 15840820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36522-30. Epub 2003 Jul 1.

How bacterial ribosomal protein L20 assembles with 23 S ribosomal RNA and its own
messenger RNA.

Raibaud S(1), Vachette P, Guillier M, Allemand F, Chiaruttini C, Dardel F.

Author information: 
(1)Cristallographie and RMN Biologiques, UMR 8015 CNRS, Faculté de Pharmacie, 4
Avenue de l'Observatoire, 75006 Paris, France.

In bacteria, the expression of ribosomal proteins is often feedback-regulated at 
the translational level by the binding of the protein to its own mRNA. This is
the case for L20, which binds to two distinct sites of its mRNA that both
resemble its binding site on 23 S rRNA. In the present work, we report an NMR
analysis of the interaction between the C-terminal domain of L20 (L20C) and both 
its rRNA- and mRNA-binding sites. Changes in the NMR chemical shifts of the L20C 
backbone nuclei were used to show that the same set of residues are modified upon
addition of either the rRNA or the mRNA fragments, suggesting a mimicry at the
atomic level. In addition, small angle x-ray scattering experiments, performed
with the rRNA fragment, demonstrated the formation of a complex made of two RNAs 
and two L20C molecules. A low resolution model of this complex was then
calculated using (i) the rRNA/L20C structure in the 50 S context and (ii) NMR and
small angle x-ray scattering results. The formation of this complex is
interesting in the context of gene regulation because it suggests that
translational repression could be performed by a complex of two proteins, each
interacting with the two distinct L20-binding sites within the operator.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304717200 
PMID: 12840018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. RNA. 2002 Jul;8(7):878-89.

Translational feedback regulation of the gene for L35 in Escherichia coli
requires binding of ribosomal protein L20 to two sites in its leader mRNA: a
possible case of ribosomal RNA-messenger RNA molecular mimicry.

Guillier M(1), Allemand F, Raibaud S, Dardel F, Springer M, Chiaruttini C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Unité Propre de Recherche 9073 du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.

In addition to being a component of the large ribosomal subunit, ribosomal
protein L20 of Escherichia coli also acts as a translational repressor. L20 is
synthesized from the IF3 operon that contains three cistrons coding for IF3, and 
ribosomal proteins L35 and L20. L20 directly represses the expression of the gene
encoding L35 and the expression of its own gene by translational coupling. All of
the cis-acting sequences required for repression by L20, called the operator, are
found on an mRNA segment extending from the middle of the IF3 gene to the start
of the L35 gene. L20-mediated repression requires a long-range base-pairing
interaction between nucleotide residues within the IF3 gene and residues just
upstream of the L35 gene. This interaction results in the formation of a
pseudoknot. Here we show that L20 causes protection of nucleotide residues in two
regions of the operator in vitro. The first region is the pseudoknot itself and
the second lies in an irregular stem located upstream of the L35 gene. By primer 
extension analysis, we show that L20 specifically induces reverse transcriptase
stops in both regions. Therefore, these two regions define two L20-binding sites 
in the operator. Using mutations and deletions of rpml'-'lacZ fusions, we show
that both sites are essential for repression in vivo. However L20 can bind to
each site independently in vitro. One site is similar to the L20-binding site on 
23S rRNA. Here we propose that L20 recognizes its mRNA and its rRNA in similar
way.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838202029084 
PMCID: PMC1370305
PMID: 12166643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (rpmI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jan 18;375(3):612-25. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

A competition mechanism regulates the translation of the Escherichia coli operon 
encoding ribosomal proteins L35 and L20.

Haentjens-Sitri J(1), Allemand F, Springer M, Chiaruttini C.

Author information: 
(1)UPR9073 du CNRS associée à l'Université de Paris VII, Institut de Biologie
Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein (r-protein) L20 is essential for the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunit and is also a translational regulator of its own
rpmI-rplT operon, encoding r-proteins L35 and L20 in that order. L20 directly
represses the translation of the first cistron and, through translational
coupling, that of its own gene. The translational operator of the operon is 450
nt in length and includes a long-range pseudoknot interaction between two RNA
sequences separated by 280 nt. L20 has the potential to bind both to this
pseudoknot and to an irregular hairpin, although only one site is occupied at a
time during regulation. This work shows that the rpmI-rplT operon is regulated by
competition between L20 and the ribosome for binding to mRNA in vitro and in
vivo. Detailed studies on the regulatory mechanisms of r-protein synthesis have
only been performed on the rpsO gene, regulated by r-protein S15, and on the
alpha operon, regulated by S4. Both are thought to be controlled by a trapping
mechanism, whereby the 30S ribosomal subunit, the mRNA, and the initiator tRNA
are blocked as a nonfunctional preternary complex. This alternative mode of
regulation of the rpmI-rplT operon raises the possibility that control is
kinetically and not thermodynamically limited in this case. We show that the
pseudoknot, which is known to be essential for L20 binding and regulation, also
enhances 30S binding to mRNA as if this structure is specifically recognised by
the ribosome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.10.058 
PMID: 18037435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1578-88. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Ribosomal protein L20 controls expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon
via a transcription attenuation mechanism.

Choonee N(1), Even S, Zig L, Putzer H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9073, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie
Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In contrast to Escherichia coli no molecular mechanism controlling the
biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins has been elucidated in Gram-positive
organisms. Here we show that the expression of the Bacillus subtilis
infC-rpmI-rplT operon encoding translation factor IF3 and the ribosomal proteins 
L35 and L20 is autoregulated by a complex transcription attenuation mechanism. It
implicates a 200-bp leader region upstream of infC which contains two conserved
regulatory elements, one of which can act as a transcription terminator. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches we show that expression of the operon is regulated
at the level of transcription elongation by a change in the structure of the
leader mRNA which depends upon the presence of ribosomal protein L20. L20 binds
to a phylogenetically conserved domain and provokes premature transcription
termination at the leader terminator. Footprint and toeprint experiments support 
a regulatory model involving molecular mimicry between the L20-binding sites on
23S rRNA and the mRNA. Our data suggest that Nomura's model of ribosomal protein 
biosynthesis based on autogenous control and molecular mimicry is also valid in
Gram-positive organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm011 
PMCID: PMC1865079
PMID: 17289755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1996 Apr 10;250(6):705-14.

Physiological effects of translation initiation factor IF3 and ribosomal protein 
L20 limitation in Escherichia coli.

Olsson CL(1), Graffe M, Springer M, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616, USA.

To investigate the physiological roles of translation initiation factor IF3 and
ribosomal protein L20 in Escherichia coli, the infC, rpmI and rpIT genes encoding
IF3, L35 and L20, respectively, were placed under the control of lac
promotor/operator sequences. Thus, their expression is dependent upon the amount 
of inducer isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG) in the medium. Lysogenic strains were
constructed with recombinant lambda phages that express either rpmI and rplT or
infC and prmI in trans, thereby allowing depletion of only IF3 or L20 at low IPTG
concentrations. At low cellular concentration of IF3, but not L20, decreases and 
the growth rate slows. Furthermore, ribosomes run off polysomes, indicating that 
IF3 functions during the initiation phase of protein synthesis in vivo. During
slow growth, the ratio of RNA to protein increases rather than decreases as
occurs with control strains, indicating that IF3 limitation disrupts feedback
inhibition of rRNA synthesis. As IF3 levels drop, expression from an
AUU-infC-lacZ fusion increases, whereas expression decreases from an
AUG-infC-lacZ fusion, thereby confirming the model of autogenous regulation of
infC. The effects of L20 limitation are similar; cells grown in low
concentrations of IPTG exhibited a decrease in the rate of growth, a decrease in 
cellular L20 concentration, no change in IF3 concentration, and a small increase 
in the ratio of RNA to protein. In addition, a decrease in 50S subunits and the
appearance of an aberrant ribosome peak at approximately 41-43S is seen. Previous
studies have shown that the L20 protein negatively controls its own gene
expression. Reduction of the cellular concentration of L20 derepresses the
expression of an rplT-lacZ gene fusion, thus confirming autogenous regulation by 
L20.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02172982 
PMID: 8628231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Microbiol. 1995 May;30(5):313-6.

Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in Buchnera aphidicola (endosymbiont of aphids):
cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment containing aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT.

Kolibachuk D(1), Rouhbakhsh D, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis 95616-8665, USA.

A 4.5-kilobase DNA fragment from Buchnera aphidicola, the endosymbiont of the
aphid Schizaphis graminum, was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of homology to 
Escherichia coli, the following genes were found in the order listed:
aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT. AroH corresponds to the E. coli tryptophan-inhibited
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase. Evidence was
presented indicating that this is the sole gene for DAHP synthase in the B.
aphidicola genome. This enzyme initiates the complex branched pathway leading to 
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. The presence of aroH is consistent with past
observations indicating that aphid endosymbionts are able to synthesize
tryptophan for the aphid host. thrS, infC, rpmI, and rplT correspond to genes for
threonine tRNA synthase, initiation factor-3, and large ribosome subunit proteins
L35 and L20, respectively. Sequence comparisons indicate some differences and
similarities between E. coli and B. aphidicola with respect to the possible
regulation of synthesis of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00295507 
PMID: 7766160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 1993 May 15;127(1):79-85.

Identification of a putative infC-rpmI-rplT operon flanked by long inverted
repeats in Mycoplasma fermentans (incognitus strain).

Hu WS(1), Wang RY, Shih JW, Lo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases Pathology, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000.

A specific 1542-bp DNA fragment was amplified from Mycoplasma fermentans
(incognitus strain) using a unique 23-nucleotide (nt) synthetic
deoxyribonucleotide (oligo) (5'-TCCAAAAAGTCCGGAATTTGGGG) as the primer pair in
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The 23-nt sequence is part of the 29-bp
terminal inverted repeat (IR) which forms the left potential stem-and-loop (s&l) 
structure of the previously identified M. fermentans insertion-sequence(IS)-like 
genetic element [Hu et al., Gene 93 (1990) 67-72]. The amplified DNA was cloned
and sequenced. A pair of 27-bp IR containing the 23-nt synthetic oligo was
identified at both termini. Between the IR, there are four potential open reading
frames (ORFs) which are arranged adjacent to each other in the order, ORF-1,
ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4, with parts of ORF-1 and ORF-2 overlapping. The deduced
amino acid (aa) sequences of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are 34 to 60% identical to
the translation initiation factor IF3 (encoded by the infC gene), ribosomal
proteins L35 (rpmI gene) and L20 (rplT gene) of Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, respectively. In bacteria, the infC-rpmI-rplT genes are
organized to function as an operon. There are multiple sites with promoter-like
sequences identified upstream from the putative infC gene in the mycoplasma
closely resembling the gene arrangement in the bacterial operon. All three genes 
of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are preceded individually by a strong appropriately
spaced (7 and 10 bp) putative Shine-Dalgarno sequence (5'-AAGGA).(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(93)90619-e 
PMID: 8486291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Biol. 1992 Nov 20;228(2):366-86.

Messenger RNA secondary structure and translational coupling in the Escherichia
coli operon encoding translation initiation factor IF3 and the ribosomal
proteins, L35 and L20.

Lesage P(1), Chiaruttini C, Graffe M, Dondon J, Milet M, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The Escherichia coli infC-rpmI-rplT operon encodes translation initiation factor 
IF3 and the ribosomal proteins, L35 and L20, respectively. The expression of the 
last cistron (rplT) has been shown to be negatively regulated at a
post-transcriptional level by its own product, L20, which acts at an internal
operator located within infC. The present work shows that L20 directly represses 
the expression of rpmI, and indirectly that of rplT, via translational coupling
with rpmI. Deletions and an inversion of the coding region of rpmI, suggest an
mRNA secondary structure forming between sequences within rpmI and the
translation initiation site of rplT. To verify the existence of this structure,
detailed analyses were performed using chemical and enzymatic probes. Also,
mutants that uncoupled rplT expression from that of rpmI, were isolated. The
mutations fall at positions that would base-pair in the secondary structure. Our 
model is that L20 binds to its operator within infC and represses the translation
of rpmI. When the rpmI mRNA is not translated, it can base-pair with the
ribosomal binding site of rplT, sequestering it, and abolishing rplT expression. 
If the rpmI mRNA is translated, i.e. covered by ribosomes, the inhibitory
structure cannot form leaving the translation initiation site of rplT free for
ribosomal binding and for full expression. Although translational coupling in
ribosomal protein operons has been suspected to be due to the formation of
secondary structures that sequester internal ribosomal binding sites, this is the
first time that such a structure has been shown to exist.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90827-7 
PMID: 1453449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 May;227(1):60-4.

In vivo transcriptional pattern in the infC operon of Bacillus
stearothermophilus.

Falconi M(1), Brombach M, Gualerzi CO, Pon CL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, University of Camerino, Italy.

By Northern blot and primer extension analyses it was shown that in Bacillus
stearothermophilus the genes infC, rpmI and rplT constitute a single
transcriptional unit; the promoter and the transcriptional start-point used in
vivo were identified and the half-life of the transcript (1.2 min) was
determined. No indication of multiple initiation sites nor of differential
stability of different regions of the transcript was found. The results suggest
that Escherichia coli and B. stearothermophilus have a different pattern of
transcription around the infC gene cluster and that differential translational
efficiency within the infC-rpmI-rplT transcriptional unit accounts for the
different levels of IF3, L35 and L20 expression. The rare AUU initiation codon is
the only strictly conserved element of the several peculiar transcriptional and
translational features found in E. coli infC. Upon changing this codon to AUG, we
found a ca. 30-fold increased expression of B. stearothermophilus infC, which is 
similar to that previously found with E. coli infC (i.e. 40-fold), and provided
evidence that regulation of infC expression through its rare AUU initiation codon
might be a general phenomenon in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00260707 
PMID: 2046659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Biol. 1990 Jun 5;213(3):465-75.

Translated translational operator in Escherichia coli. Auto-regulation in the
infC-rpmI-rplT operon.

Lesage P(1), Truong HN, Graffe M, Dondon J, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The genes coding for translation initiation factor IF3 (infC) and for the
ribosomal proteins L35 (rpmI) and L20 (rplT) are transcribed in that order from a
promoter in front of infC. The last two cistrons of the operon (rpmI and rplT)
can be transcribed from a weak secondary promoter situated within the first
cistron (infC). Previous experiments have shown that the expression of infC, the 
first cistron of the operon, is negatively autoregulated at the translational
level and that the abnormal AUU initiation codon of infC is responsible for the
control. We show that the expression of the last cistron (rplT) is also
autoregulated at the posttranscriptional level. The L20 concentration regulates
the level of rplT expression by acting in trans at a site located within the
first cistron (infC) and thus different from that at which IF3 is known to act.
This regulatory site, several hundred nucleotides upstream from the target gene
(rplT), was identified through deletions, insertions and a point mutation. Thus, 
the expression of the operon is controlled in trans by the products of two
different cistrons acting at two different sites. The localization within an open
reading frame (infC) of a regulatory site acting in cis on the translation of a
downstream gene (rplT) is new and was unforeseen since ribosomes translating
through the regulatory site might be expected to impair either the binding of L20
or the mRNA secondary structure change caused by the binding. The possible
competition between translation of the regions acting in cis and the regulation
of the expression of the target gene is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80208-6 
PMID: 2191140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Aug;218(2):355-7.

Cloning and characterization of a gene cluster from Bacillus stearothermophilus
comprising infC, rpmI and rplT.

Pon CL(1), Brombach M, Thamm S, Gualerzi CO.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt. Wittmann, Berlin.

Using two synthetic deoxyribonucleotide probes encoding segments of the primary
structure of initiation factor IF3 from Bacillus stearothermophilus, we
identified and cloned a segment of DNA which carries the infC gene. As in
Escherichia coli, the infC gene begins with the unusual initiation triplet AUU,
and is followed by the structural genes for ribosomal proteins L35 and L20 (rpmI 
and rplT, respectively).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00331290 
PMID: 2779520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biochem. 1987 Mar;101(3):817-20.

Primary structures of and genes for new ribosomal proteins A and B in Escherichia
coli.

Wada A, Sako T.

We determined the partial primary structures of and identified the genes for new 
basic proteins A and B in Escherichia coli ribosomal 50S subunits, found by means
of an improved two-dimensional gel electrophoresis method. The sequence up to the
17th amino acid of protein B was in agreement with that of the X gene in the spc 
operon. The gene for protein A was searched for in the GenBank data base using
the sequence up to the 35th amino acid, and was found at a locus between infC and
rplT. The base sequence indicated that protein A contained 64 amino acids and had
a molecular weight of 6,984. We conclude that proteins A and B are intrinsic
ribosomal proteins, and propose calling their genes, rpmI and rpmJ, respectively.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/101.3.817 
PMID: 3298224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rsd) AND (rpoD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Genet. 2019 Dec 4;10:1153. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153. eCollection 2019.

Coordinated Regulation of Rsd and RMF for Simultaneous Hibernation of
Transcription Apparatus and Translation Machinery in Stationary-Phase Escherichia
coli.

Yoshida H(1), Wada A(2), Shimada T(3)(4), Maki Y(1), Ishihama A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan.
(2)Yoshida Biological Laboratory, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kawasaki, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.

Transcription and translation in growing phase of Escherichia coli, the
best-studied model prokaryote, are coupled and regulated in coordinate fashion.
Accordingly, the growth rate-dependent control of the synthesis of RNA polymerase
(RNAP) core enzyme (the core component of transcription apparatus) and ribosomes 
(the core component of translation machinery) is tightly coordinated to keep the 
relative level of transcription apparatus and translation machinery constant for 
effective and efficient utilization of resources and energy. Upon entry into the 
stationary phase, transcription apparatus is modulated by replacing RNAP
core-associated sigma (promoter recognition subunit) from growth-related RpoD to 
stationary-phase-specific RpoS. The anti-sigma factor Rsd participates for the
efficient replacement of sigma, and the unused RpoD is stored silent as Rsd-RpoD 
complex. On the other hand, functional 70S ribosome is transformed into inactive 
100S dimer by two regulators, ribosome modulation factor (RMF) and hibernation
promoting factor (HPF). In this review article, we overview how we found these
factors and what we know about the molecular mechanisms for silencing
transcription apparatus and translation machinery by these factors. In addition, 
we provide our recent findings of promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) 
screening of the transcription factors involved in regulation of the rsd and rmf 
genes. Results altogether indicate the coordinated regulation of Rsd and RMF for 
simultaneous hibernation of transcription apparatus and translation machinery.

Copyright © 2019 Yoshida, Wada, Shimada, Maki and Ishihama.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153 
PMCID: PMC6904343
PMID: 31867037 


2. mSystems. 2018 Sep 11;3(5). pii: e00057-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18.
eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Coordinated Hibernation of Transcriptional and Translational Apparatus during
Growth Transition of Escherichia coli to Stationary Phase.

Yoshida H(1), Shimada T(2), Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the process of Escherichia coli K-12 growth from exponential phase to
stationary, marked alteration takes place in the pattern of overall genome
expression through modulation of both parts of the transcriptional and
translational apparatus. In transcription, the sigma subunit with promoter
recognition properties is replaced from the growth-related factor RpoD by the
stationary-phase-specific factor RpoS. The unused RpoD is stored by binding with 
the anti-sigma factor Rsd. In translation, the functional 70S ribosome is
converted to inactive 100S dimers through binding with the ribosome modulation
factor (RMF). Up to the present time, the regulatory mechanisms of expression of 
these two critical proteins, Rsd and RMF, have remained totally unsolved. In this
study, attempts were made to identify the whole set of transcription factors
involved in transcription regulation of the rsd and rmf genes using the newly
developed promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) screening system. In the
first screening, 74 candidate TFs with binding activity to both of the rsd and
rmf promoters were selected from a total of 194 purified TFs. After 6 cycles of
screening, we selected 5 stress response TFs, ArcA, McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA,
for detailed analysis in vitro and in vivo of their regulatory roles. Results
indicated that both rsd and rmf promoters are repressed by ArcA and activated by 
McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA. We propose the involvement of a number of TFs in
simultaneous and coordinated regulation of the transcriptional and translational 
apparatus. By using genomic SELEX (gSELEX) screening, each of the five TFs was
found to regulate not only the rsd and rmf genes but also a variety of genes for 
growth and survival. IMPORTANCE During the growth transition of E. coli from
exponential phase to stationary, the genome expression pattern is altered
markedly. For this alteration, the transcription apparatus is altered by binding 
of anti-sigma factor Rsd to the RpoD sigma factor for sigma factor replacement,
while the translation machinery is modulated by binding of RMF to 70S ribosome to
form inactive ribosome dimer. Using the PS-TF screening system, a number of TFs
were found to bind to both the rsd and rmf promoters, of which the regulatory
roles of 5 representative TFs (one repressor ArcA and the four activators McbR,
RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA) were analyzed in detail. The results altogether indicated
the involvement of a common set of TFs, each sensing a specific environmental
condition, in coordinated hibernation of the transcriptional and translational
apparatus for adaptation and survival under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18 
PMCID: PMC6134199
PMID: 30225374 


3. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 22;8(8):e72329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072329. eCollection
2013.

Evidence for sigma factor competition in the regulation of alginate production by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Yin Y(1), Withers TR, Wang X, Yu HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Joan C. Edwards School of
Medicine at Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia, USA.

Alginate overproduction, or mucoidy, plays an important role in the pathogenesis 
of P. aeruginosa lung infection in cystic fibrosis (CF). Mucoid strains with mucA
mutations predominantly populate in chronically-infected patients. However, the
mucoid strains can revert to nonmucoidy in vitro through suppressor mutations. We
screened a mariner transposon library using CF149, a non-mucoid clinical isolate 
with a misssense mutation in algU (AlgU(A61V)). The wild type AlgU is a
stress-related sigma factor that activates transcription of alginate
biosynthesis. Three mucoid mutants were identified with transposon insertions
that caused 1) an overexpression of AlgU(A61V), 2) an overexpression of the
stringent starvation protein A (SspA), and 3) a reduced expression of the major
sigma factor RpoD (σ(70)). Induction of AlgU(A61V) in trans caused conversion to 
mucoidy in CF149 and PAO1DalgU, suggesting that AlgU(A61V) is functional in
activating alginate production. Furthermore, the level of AlgU(A61V) was
increased in all three mutants relative to CF149. However, compared to the wild
type AlgU, AlgU(A61V) had a reduced activity in promoting alginate production in 
PAO1ΔalgU. SspA and three other anti-σ(70) orthologues, P. aeruginosa AlgQ, E.
coli Rsd, and T4 phage AsiA, all induced mucoidy, suggesting that reducing
activity of RpoD is linked to mucoid conversion in CF149. Conversely, RpoD
overexpression resulted in suppression of mucoidy in all mucoid strains tested,
indicating that sigma factor competition can regulate mucoidy. Additionally, an
RpoD-dependent promoter (PssrA ) was more active in non-mucoid strains than in
isogenic mucoid variants. Altogether, our results indicate that the anti-σ(70)
factors can induce conversion to mucoidy in P. aeruginosa CF149 with
algU-suppressor mutation via modulation of RpoD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072329 
PMCID: PMC3750012
PMID: 23991093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2005 Aug;187(15):5097-107.

Involvement of AlgQ in transcriptional regulation of pyoverdine genes in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1.

Ambrosi C(1), Tiburzi F, Imperi F, Putignani L, Visca P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Roma Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 
Roma, Italy. visca@bio.uniroma3.it

In response to iron limitation, Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces the fluorescent
siderophore pyoverdine. Transcription of pyoverdine biosynthetic (pvd) genes is
driven by the iron starvation sigma factor PvdS, which is negatively regulated by
the Fur-Fe(II) holorepressor. We studied the effect of AlgQ, the Escherichia coli
Rsd orthologue, on pyoverdine production by P. aeruginosa PAO1. AlgQ is a global 
regulatory protein which activates alginate, ppGpp, and inorganic polyphosphate
synthesis through a cascade involving nucleoside diphosphate kinase (Ndk). AlgQ
is also capable of interacting with region 4 of RpoD. In a reconstituted E. coli 
system, PvdS-dependent transcription from the pvdA promoter was doubled by the
multicopy algQ gene. The P. aeruginosa DeltaalgQ mutant exhibited a moderate but 
reproducible reduction in pyoverdine production compared with wild-type PAO1, as 
a result of a decline in transcription of pvd genes. PvdS expression was not
affected by the algQ mutation. Single-copy algQ fully restored pyoverdine
production and expression of pvd genes in the DeltaalgQ mutant, while ndk did
not. An increased intracellular concentration of RpoD mimicked the DeltaalgQ
phenotype, whereas PvdS overexpression suppressed the algQ mutation. E. coli rsd 
could partially substitute for algQ in transcriptional modulation of pvd genes.
We propose that AlgQ acts as an anti-sigma factor for RpoD, eliciting core RNA
polymerase recruitment by PvdS and transcription initiation at pvd promoters.
AlgQ provides a link between the pyoverdine and alginate regulatory networks.
These systems have similarities in responsiveness and physiological function:
both depend on alternative sigma factors, respond to nutrient starvation, and act
as virulence determinants for P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.15.5097-5107.2005 
PMCID: PMC1196021
PMID: 16030202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Dev. 2002 May 15;16(10):1260-70.

Regulation of sigma factor competition by the alarmone ppGpp.

Jishage M(1), Kvint K, Shingler V, Nyström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology-Microbiology, Göteborg University,
405 30 Göteberg, Sweden.

Many regulons controlled by alternative sigma factors, including sigma(S) and
sigma(32), are poorly induced in cells lacking the alarmone ppGpp. We show that
ppGpp is not absolutely required for the activity of sigma(S)-dependent promoters
because underproduction of sigma(70), specific mutations in rpoD (rpoD40 and
rpoD35), or overproduction of Rsd (anti-sigma(70)) restored expression from
sigma(S)-dependent promoters in vivo in the absence of ppGpp accumulation. An in 
vitro transcription/competition assay with reconstituted RNA polymerase showed
that addition of ppGpp reduces the ability of wild-type sigma(70) to compete with
sigma(32) for core binding and the mutant sigma(70) proteins, encoded by rpoD40
and rpoD35, compete less efficiently than wild-type sigma(70). Similarly, an in
vivo competition assay showed that the ability of both sigma(32) and sigma(S) to 
compete with sigma(70) is diminished in cells lacking ppGpp. Consistently, the
fraction of sigma(S) and sigma(32) bound to core was drastically reduced in
ppGpp-deficient cells. Thus, the stringent response encompasses a mechanism that 
alters the relative competitiveness of sigma factors in accordance with cellular 
demands during physiological stress.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.227902 
PMCID: PMC186289
PMID: 12023304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rsd) AND (rsd)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Foods. 2021 Aug 20;10(8). pii: 1933. doi: 10.3390/foods10081933.

Preparation and Directed Evolution of Anti-Ciprofloxacin ScFv for Immunoassay in 
Animal-Derived Food.

Wang F(1), Li N(2), Zhang Y(1), Sun X(1), Hu M(1), Zhao Y(2), Fan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Immunology, Henan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
116#Huayuan Road, Zhengzhou 450002, China.
(2)Department of Food Nutrition and Health, College of Food Science and
Technology, Henan Agricultural University, 63#Agricultural Road, Zhengzhou
450000, China.
(3)China College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, 100#Kexue Avenue,
Zhengzhou 450001, China.

An immunized mouse phage display scFv library with a capacity of 3.34 × 109
CFU/mL was constructed and used for screening of recombinant anti-ciprofloxacin
single-chain antibody for the detection of ciprofloxacin (CIP) in animal-derived 
food. After four rounds of bio-panning, 25 positives were isolated and identified
successfully. The highest positive scFv-22 was expressed in E. coli BL21. Then,
its recognition mechanisms were studied using the molecular docking method. The
result showed the amino acid residue Val160 was the key residue for the binding
of scFv to CIP. Based on the results of virtual mutation, the scFv antibody was
evolved by directional mutagenesis of contact amino acid residue Val160 to Ser.
After the expression and purification, an indirect competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (IC-ELISA) based on the parental and mutant scFv was
established for CIP, respectively. The IC50 value of the assay established with
the ScFv mutant was 1.58 ng/mL, while the parental scFv was 26.23 ng/mL; this
result showed highly increased affinity, with up to 16.6-fold improved
sensitivity. The mean recovery for CIP ranged from 73.80% to 123.35%, with 10.46%
relative standard deviation between the intra-assay and the inter-assay. The RSD 
values ranged between 1.49% and 9.81%. The results indicate that we obtained a
highly sensitive anti-CIP scFv by the phage library construction and directional 
evolution, and the scFv-based IC-ELISA is suitable for the detection of CIP
residue in animal-derived edible tissues.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10081933 
PMCID: PMC8394695
PMID: 34441715 


2. J AOAC Int. 2021 Aug 20;104(4):1049-1054. doi: 10.1093/jaoacint/qsab017.

Miniaturized Microbiological Method to Determine the Potency of Rifaximin in
Tablets.

Correa CBM(1), Kogawa AC(2), Chorilli M(1), Salgado HRN(1).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo State University, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of
Drugs and Medicines, Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Goiás, Faculdade de Farmácia, Laboratório de Controle 
de Qualidade, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Rifaximin, a semi-synthetic antimicrobial, does not present
microbiological method described in official compendia, and there is a lack of
literature on this topic. The quality control of antimicrobials is extremely
important to evaluate the real potency of pharmaceutical products.
OBJECTIVE: A miniaturized turbidimetric method for determining the potency of
rifaximin in tablets was developed and validated by turbidimetry, according to
the international guidelines.
METHOD: Escherichia coli ATCC 10536 IAL 2393, brain heart infusion (BHI) broth,
inoculum at 8%, rifaximin in purified water with 20% ethanol at 5, 10, and
20 μg/mL and 530 nm were used.
RESULTS: The method was considered selective for rifaximin, as the adjuvants did 
not show activity; linear with correlation coefficients 0.9998 for standard and
0.9999 for sample; accurate with 99.73% recovery; precise with RSD less than 3%; 
and robust in the face of small variations in (i) rifaximin volume, (ii)
proportion of ethanol, (iii) inoculum volume.
CONCLUSIONS: The method is considered adequate and safe to evaluate the potency
of rifaximin in tablets, contemplating speed, low cost, low waste generation, and
ease of operation.
HIGHLIGHTS: This work usescurrent, sustainable, and green analytical chemistry
and can be used in the routine analyses of rifaximin by laboratories and the
pharmaceutical industry around the world.

© AOAC INTERNATIONAL 2021. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jaoacint/qsab017 
PMID: 33512492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Chromatogr Sci. 2020 Aug 21;58(8):737-746. doi: 10.1093/chromsci/bmaa045.

Application of Optimized and Validated Agar Overlay TLC-Bioautography Assay for
Detecting the Antimicrobial Metabolites of Pharmaceutical Interest.

Nuthan BR(1), Rakshith D(1), Marulasiddaswamy KM(2), Rao HCY(3), Ramesha KP(1),
Mohana NC(1), Siddappa S(4), Darshan D(5), Kumara KKS(6), Satish S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Studies in Microbiology, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri,
Mysuru 570 006, India.
(2)Department of Studies in Biotechnology, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri, 
Mysuru 570 006, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560 012,
Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Studies in Biochemistry, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri,
Mysuru 570 006, India.
(5)Plant Cell Biotechnology, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysuru 570 005, India.
(6)Government Pre-University College, Davangere 577 002, India.

The agar overlay TLC-bioautography is one of the crucial methods for simultaneous
in situ detection and separation of antimicrobial metabolites of pharmaceutical
interest. The main focus of this research relies on the dereplication of an
antimicrobial metabolite coriloxin derived from mycoendophytic Xylaria sp.
NBRTSB-20 with a validation of agar overlay TLC-bioautography technique. This
polyketide metabolite coriloxin was purified by column chromatography, and its
purity was assessed by HPLC, UPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS, FT-IR and NMR spectral analysis.
The antimicrobial capability of ethyl acetate extract and the purified compound
coriloxin was determined by disc diffusion, minimal inhibitory concentration and 
agar overlay TLC-bioautography assay. The visible LOD of coriloxin antimicrobial 
activity was found at 10 μg for Escherichia coli and 20 μg for both
Staphylococcus aureus and Fusarium oxysporum. Inter- and intra-day precision was 
determined as the relative standard deviation is less than 6.56%, which proved
that this method was precise. The accuracy was expressed as recovery, and the
values were found ranging from 91.18 to 108.73% with RSD values 0.94-2.30%,
respectively. The overall findings of this investigation suggest that agar
overlay TLC-bioautography assay is a suitable and acceptable method for the in
situ determination of antimicrobial pharmaceuticals.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/chromsci/bmaa045 
PMID: 32766714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arh Hig Rada Toksikol. 2019 Dec 1;70(4):325-331. doi: 10.2478/aiht-2019-70-3352.

Optimisation of a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry method for the
simultaneous determination of tetrahydrocannabinol and its metabolites in rat
urine.

Fuchs N(1), Miljanić A(2), Katić A(3), Brajenović N(3), Micek V(3), Fuchs R(3),
Karačonji IB(3).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, Croatia.
(3)Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health, Zagreb, Croatia.

In order to evaluate the effect of irinotecan (IRI) on urinary elimination of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in a rat experimental model, we developed an
analytical method for the determination of the mass concentration of THC and its 
metabolites [11-hydroxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC-OH) and
11-nor-9-carboxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC-COOH)] in the urine of rats
treated only with THC and treated simultaneously with THC and irinotecan. For
this purpose, hydrolysis and solid phase extraction conditions of the
investigated analytes were optimised and a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) method was developed to determine all three analytes in rat urine. The
most effective hydrolysis method for THC, THC-OH, and THC-COOH conjugates was
so-called tandem hydrolysis by the β-glucuronidase enzyme from Escherichia coli
at 50 °C for 2 hours and followed by alkaline hydrolysis. The proposed method was
then applied for determining concentrations of analytes in 24-hour rat urine. THC
was not detected in either sample, THC-OH was detected in 50 % of samples, and
THC-COOH in all of the samples. Enhanced urinary THC-COOH excretion was noted in 
rats administered combined treatment compared to single THC treatment. The method
described herein was suitable for determining the mass concentration of THC
metabolites in the rat urine due to its sensitivity (detection limits: 0.8-1.0
μg/L), accuracy (>96 %), and precision (RSD <6 %).

DOI: 10.2478/aiht-2019-70-3352 
PMID: 32623866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. mBio. 2020 Jun 9;11(3). pii: e00485-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00485-20.

Tombusvirus p19 Captures RNase III-Cleaved Double-Stranded RNAs Formed by
Overlapping Sense and Antisense Transcripts in Escherichia coli.

Huang L(1)(2)(3)(4), Deighan P(5)(6), Jin J(7), Li Y(3)(4), Cheung HC(3)(4), Lee 
E(8)(2), Mo SS(8)(2), Hoover H(9), Abubucker S(9), Finkel N(9), McReynolds L(7), 
Hochschild A(5), Lieberman J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA linfeng.huang@cityu.edu.hk
judy.lieberman@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Jockey Club College of Veterinary Medicine 
and Life Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Biotechnology and Health Centre, City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen
Research Institute, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Emmanuel College, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Division of RNA Biology, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Antisense transcription is widespread in bacteria. By base pairing with
overlapping sense RNAs, antisense RNAs (asRNA) can form double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNA), which are cleaved by RNase III, a dsRNA endoribonuclease. The ectopic
expression of plant Tombusvirus p19 in Escherichia coli stabilizes ∼21-nucleotide
(nt) dsRNA RNase III decay intermediates, which enabled us to characterize
otherwise highly unstable asRNA by deep sequencing of p19-captured dsRNA. RNase
III-produced small dsRNA were formed at most bacterial genes in the bacterial
genome and in a plasmid. We classified the types of asRNA in genomic clusters
producing the most abundant p19-captured dsRNA and confirmed RNase III regulation
of asRNA and sense RNA decay at three type I toxin-antitoxin loci and at a coding
gene, rsd Furthermore, we provide potential evidence for the RNase III-dependent 
regulation of CspD protein by asRNA. The analysis of p19-captured dsRNA revealed 
an RNase III sequence preference for AU-rich sequences 3 nucleotides on either
side of the cleavage sites and for GC-rich sequences in the 2-nt overhangs.
Unexpectedly, GC-rich sequences were enriched in the middle section of
p19-captured dsRNA, suggesting some unexpected sequence bias in p19 protein
binding. Nonetheless, the ectopic expression of p19 is a sensitive method for
identifying antisense transcripts and RNase III cleavage sites in dsRNA formed by
overlapping sense and antisense transcripts in bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00485-20 
PMCID: PMC7373196
PMID: 32518184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. NPJ Microgravity. 2020 Apr 8;6:11. doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-0101-4. eCollection
2020.

Growth of microorganisms in an interfacially driven space bioreactor analog.

Adam JA(1), Gulati S(1), Hirsa AH(1)(2), Bonocora RP(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3590 USA.
(2)2Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3590 USA.
(3)3Department of Biological Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
12180-3590 USA.

Fluid bioreactors in microgravity environments may utilize alternative methods of
containment and mixing. The ring-sheared drop (RSD) is a containerless mixing
device which functions in microgravity using surface tension for containment and 
mixes through interfacially-driven flow. To assess the feasibility of using
interfacially driven flow devices, such as the RSD, as bioreactors, Escherichia
coli growth and recombinant protein expression were analyzed in a ground-based
analog of the RSD called the knife edge surface viscometer (KEV). Results
demonstrated that the KEV can facilitate the growth of E. coli and that growth
rate increases logarithmically with increasing knife edge rotation rate, similar 
to the standard growth method on Earth (orbital shaker). Furthermore, the KEV was
shown to be viable for supporting recombinant protein expression in E. coli at
levels comparable to those achieved using standard growth methods.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-020-0101-4 
PMCID: PMC7142127
PMID: 32284962 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.


7. Mikrochim Acta. 2020 Feb 14;187(3):169. doi: 10.1007/s00604-020-4140-z.

Electrochemical quantification of Ag2S quantum dots: evaluation of different
surface coating ligands for bacteria determination.

Amor-Gutiérrez O(1), Iglesias-Mayor A(1), Llano-Suárez P(2), Costa-Fernández
JM(2), Soldado A(3), Podadera A(4), Parra F(4), Costa-García A(1), de la
Escosura-Muñiz A(5).

Author information: 
(1)NanoBioAnalysis Group-Department of Physical and Analytical Chemistry,
University of Oviedo, Julián Clavería 8, 33006, Oviedo, Spain.
(2)Department of Physical and Analytical Chemistry, University of Oviedo, Julián 
Clavería 8, 33006, Oviedo, Spain.
(3)Department of Animal Nutrition, Grassland and Forages, Regional Institute for 
Research and Agro-Food Development (SERIDA), Villaviciosa, Asturias, Spain.
(4)Instituto Universitario de Biotecnología de Asturias, Departamento de
Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Edificio Santiago Gascón, Universidad de Oviedo,
Campus El Cristo, 33006, Oviedo, Spain.
(5)NanoBioAnalysis Group-Department of Physical and Analytical Chemistry,
University of Oviedo, Julián Clavería 8, 33006, Oviedo, Spain.
alfredo.escosura@uniovi.es.

In this work, novel silver sulphide quantum dots (Ag2S QD) are electrochemically 
quantified for the first time. The method is based on the electrochemical
reduction of Ag+ to Ag0 at -0.3 V on screen-printed carbon electrodes (SPCEs),
followed by anodic stripping voltammetric oxidation that gives a peak of currents
at +0.06 V which represents the analytical signal. The optimized methodology
allows the quantification of water-stabilized Ag2S QD in the range of
approximately 2 × 109-2 × 1012 QD·mL-1 with a good reproducibility (RSD: 5%).
Moreover, as proof-of-concept of relevant biosensing application, Ag2S QD are
evaluated as tags for Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria determination. Bacteria
tagged with QD are separated by centrifugation from the sample solution and
placed on the SPCE surface for quantitative analysis. The effect of two different
Ag2S QD surface coating/stabilizing agents on both the voltammetric response and 
the bacteria sensing is also evaluated. 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA) is
studied as model of short length coating ligand with no affinity for the
bacteria, while boronic acid (BA) is evaluated as longer length ligand with
chemical affinity for the polysaccharides present in the peptidoglycan layer on
the bacteria cells surface. The biosensing system allows to detect bacteria in
the range 10-1-103 bacteria·mL-1 with a limit of detection as low as 1
bacteria·mL-1. This methodology is a promising proof-of-concept alternative to
traditional laboratory-based tests, with good sensitivity and short time and low 
cost of analysis. Graphical abstractNovel silver sulphide quantum dots (Ag2S QD) 
are electrochemically quantified for the first time. Moreover, Ag2S QD are
evaluated as tags for Escherichia coli bacteria determination. The effect of two 
different QD surface coating ligands is also evaluated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00604-020-4140-z 
PMID: 32060641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Genet. 2019 Dec 4;10:1153. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153. eCollection 2019.

Coordinated Regulation of Rsd and RMF for Simultaneous Hibernation of
Transcription Apparatus and Translation Machinery in Stationary-Phase Escherichia
coli.

Yoshida H(1), Wada A(2), Shimada T(3)(4), Maki Y(1), Ishihama A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan.
(2)Yoshida Biological Laboratory, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kawasaki, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.

Transcription and translation in growing phase of Escherichia coli, the
best-studied model prokaryote, are coupled and regulated in coordinate fashion.
Accordingly, the growth rate-dependent control of the synthesis of RNA polymerase
(RNAP) core enzyme (the core component of transcription apparatus) and ribosomes 
(the core component of translation machinery) is tightly coordinated to keep the 
relative level of transcription apparatus and translation machinery constant for 
effective and efficient utilization of resources and energy. Upon entry into the 
stationary phase, transcription apparatus is modulated by replacing RNAP
core-associated sigma (promoter recognition subunit) from growth-related RpoD to 
stationary-phase-specific RpoS. The anti-sigma factor Rsd participates for the
efficient replacement of sigma, and the unused RpoD is stored silent as Rsd-RpoD 
complex. On the other hand, functional 70S ribosome is transformed into inactive 
100S dimer by two regulators, ribosome modulation factor (RMF) and hibernation
promoting factor (HPF). In this review article, we overview how we found these
factors and what we know about the molecular mechanisms for silencing
transcription apparatus and translation machinery by these factors. In addition, 
we provide our recent findings of promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) 
screening of the transcription factors involved in regulation of the rsd and rmf 
genes. Results altogether indicate the coordinated regulation of Rsd and RMF for 
simultaneous hibernation of transcription apparatus and translation machinery.

Copyright © 2019 Yoshida, Wada, Shimada, Maki and Ishihama.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153 
PMCID: PMC6904343
PMID: 31867037 


9. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2019 Sep 25;35(9):1723-1735. doi:
10.13345/j.cjb.190129.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against human interleukin-35 and their
application in a quantitative ELISA for interleukin-35 detection].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

He F(1)(2), Sun Y(2), Yue X(2), Liu Y(2), Liu M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, College of Life
Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, Hubei, China.
(2)Wuhan Coud-clone Science and Technology Co. Ltd, Wuhan 430056, Hubei, China.
(3)National and Local Joint Engineering Research Center of High-throughput Drug
Screening Technology, Wuhan 430062, Hubei, China.

To establish a quantitative ELISA for human interleukin-35 (IL-35) detection, we 
cloned cDNAs encoding the 2 subunits IL-27EBI3 and IL-12p35 of IL-35 by RT-PCR
and transformed the cDNAs into Escherichia coli BL21 star (DE3) by recombinant
DNA technology. IL-27EBI3 and IL-12p35 were expressed as recombinant proteins and
used as immunogen to immunize Balb/c mice. Spleen cells from the positive serum
mice were isolated and fused with SP-2/0 myeloma cells. We obtained the hybridoma
cell lines stably secreting target antibodies by indirect ELISA screening of the 
cell supernatants with recombinant IL-27EBI3 and IL-12p35 as antigen and
consecutive subcloning of the cells in the well with positive supernatant.
Following further measurement of supernatant titers of the antibodies and
identification of their antigen specificity, we obtained a hybridoma cell line
3B11 that stably secrets antibody against IL-27EBI3 and a hybridoma cell line
3A10 that secrets antibody against IL-12p35. Both monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
were identified as the subtype of IgG1. Finally, using the anti-IL-27EBI3 mAb
from 3B11 as the capture antibody and the anti-IL-12p35 mAb from 3A10 as the
secondary antibody, we established a quantitative double-antibodies sandwich
ELISA for IL-35 detection with streptavidin-biotin amplification system. Results 
demonstrated that the quantitative assay had a detection range of 3.12-200 pg/mL,
a detectability of 1.26 pg/mL, and a crossing-reactive rate of 0.1%. The
intra-batch RSD and the inter-batch RSD of the quantitative assay were 5.1%-5.6% 
and 5.6%-7.2%, respectively, and the fortified recovery was 89%-103%. Therefore, 
the sandwich ELISA assay for IL-35 meets the qualification of quantitative
analysis and laid a stable foundation for the development of quantitative ELISA
kit for IL-35 detection.

Publisher: 为了建立人白细胞介素-35 (IL-35) 的定量ELISA 检测方法，RT-PCR 克隆了人IL-35 的IL-27EBI3
亚基和IL-12p35 亚基的编码基因，在大肠杆菌中实现了2 个亚基的高效表达。以大肠杆菌表达的IL-27EBI3
和IL-12p35重组蛋白作为免疫原，免疫BaLb/c 小鼠，选取阳性血清小鼠的脾细胞与小鼠骨髓瘤SP2/0
细胞融合，用间接ELISA和有限稀释法进行单克隆杂交瘤细胞的筛选和克隆，获得了稳定分泌抗IL-27EBI3 和抗IL-12p35
单克隆抗体的杂交瘤细胞株。在效价测定和特异性鉴定的基础上，进一步筛选出一株能稳定分泌抗IL-27EBI3 单克隆抗体的杂交瘤细胞株3B11
和一株能稳定分泌抗IL-12p35 单克隆抗体杂交瘤细胞株3A10，亚类鉴定两株单抗均为IgG1。应用单抗3B11 和3A10 建立了IL-35
双抗夹心定量ELISA 检测方法，借助生物素-亲和素放大效应，该方法检测IL-35线性范围为3.12–200 pg/mL，最低检测限为1.26
pg/mL，与多种其他抗原的交叉反应率为0.1%，批内相对标准偏差 (RSD) 为5.1%–5.6%，批间RSD
为5.6%–7.2%，添加回收率为89%–103%，达到定量分析的要求，为进一步组装IL-35 定量ELISA 检测试剂盒打下了基础。.
DOI: 10.13345/j.cjb.190129 
PMID: 31559754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2019 Nov;66(6):962-976. doi: 10.1002/bab.1813. Epub 2019
Sep 16.

Developing an l-threonine-producing strain from wild-type Escherichia coli by
modifying the glucose uptake, glyoxylate shunt, and l-threonine biosynthetic
pathway.

Zhu L(1)(2), Fang Y(1)(2), Ding Z(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(3)International Joint Laboratory on Food Safety, Jiangnan University, Wuxi,
China.

Wild-type Escherichia coli MG1655 usually does not accumulate l-threonine. In
this study, the effects of 13 genes related to the glucose uptake, glycolysis,
TCA cycle, l-threonine biosynthesis, or their regulation on l-threonine
accumulation in E. coli MG1655 were investigated. Sixteen E. coli mutant strains 
were constructed by chromosomal deletion or overexpression of one or more genes
of rsd, ptsG, ptsH, ptsI, crr, galP, glk, iclR, and gltA; the plasmid
pFW01-thrA*BC-rhtC harboring the key genes for l-threonine biosynthesis and
secretion was introduced into these mutants. The analyses on cell growth, glucose
consumption, and l-threonine production of these recombinant strains showed that 
most of these strains could accumulate l-threonine, and the highest yield was
obtained in WMZ016/pFW01-thrA*BC-rhtC. WMZ016 was derived from MG1655 by deleting
crr and iclR and enhancing the expression of gltA. WMZ016/pFW01-thrA*BC-rhtC
could produce 17.98 g/L l-threonine with a yield of 0.346 g/g glucose, whereas
the control strain MG1655/pFW01-thrA*BC-rhtC could only produce 0.68 g/L
l-threonine. In addition, WMZ016/pFW01-thrA*BC-rhtC could tolerate the high
concentration of glucose and produced no detectable by-products; therefore, it
should be an ideal platform strain for further development. The results indicate 
that manipulating the glucose uptake and TCA cycle could efficiently increase
l-threonine production in E. coli.

© 2019 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.1813 
PMID: 31486127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rsd) AND (sdiA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. mSystems. 2018 Sep 11;3(5). pii: e00057-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18.
eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Coordinated Hibernation of Transcriptional and Translational Apparatus during
Growth Transition of Escherichia coli to Stationary Phase.

Yoshida H(1), Shimada T(2), Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the process of Escherichia coli K-12 growth from exponential phase to
stationary, marked alteration takes place in the pattern of overall genome
expression through modulation of both parts of the transcriptional and
translational apparatus. In transcription, the sigma subunit with promoter
recognition properties is replaced from the growth-related factor RpoD by the
stationary-phase-specific factor RpoS. The unused RpoD is stored by binding with 
the anti-sigma factor Rsd. In translation, the functional 70S ribosome is
converted to inactive 100S dimers through binding with the ribosome modulation
factor (RMF). Up to the present time, the regulatory mechanisms of expression of 
these two critical proteins, Rsd and RMF, have remained totally unsolved. In this
study, attempts were made to identify the whole set of transcription factors
involved in transcription regulation of the rsd and rmf genes using the newly
developed promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) screening system. In the
first screening, 74 candidate TFs with binding activity to both of the rsd and
rmf promoters were selected from a total of 194 purified TFs. After 6 cycles of
screening, we selected 5 stress response TFs, ArcA, McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA,
for detailed analysis in vitro and in vivo of their regulatory roles. Results
indicated that both rsd and rmf promoters are repressed by ArcA and activated by 
McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA. We propose the involvement of a number of TFs in
simultaneous and coordinated regulation of the transcriptional and translational 
apparatus. By using genomic SELEX (gSELEX) screening, each of the five TFs was
found to regulate not only the rsd and rmf genes but also a variety of genes for 
growth and survival. IMPORTANCE During the growth transition of E. coli from
exponential phase to stationary, the genome expression pattern is altered
markedly. For this alteration, the transcription apparatus is altered by binding 
of anti-sigma factor Rsd to the RpoD sigma factor for sigma factor replacement,
while the translation machinery is modulated by binding of RMF to 70S ribosome to
form inactive ribosome dimer. Using the PS-TF screening system, a number of TFs
were found to bind to both the rsd and rmf promoters, of which the regulatory
roles of 5 representative TFs (one repressor ArcA and the four activators McbR,
RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA) were analyzed in detail. The results altogether indicated
the involvement of a common set of TFs, each sensing a specific environmental
condition, in coordinated hibernation of the transcriptional and translational
apparatus for adaptation and survival under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18 
PMCID: PMC6134199
PMID: 30225374 


############# ((rseB) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseB) AND (rseB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2020 Apr 16;19(2):159-171. doi:
10.18502/ijaai.v19i2.2767.

Immunogenicity Evaluation of Recombinant Staphylococcus aureus Enterotoxin B
(rSEB) and rSEB-loaded Chitosan Nanoparticles Following Nasal Administration.

Hosseini SA(1), Nazarian S(2), Ebrahimi F(3), Hajizade A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Imam Hossein University,
Tehran, Iran. s.a.hoseini360@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Imam Hossein University,
Tehran, Iran. nazarian56@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Imam Hossein University,
Tehran, Iran. febrhimi@ihu.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Imam Hossein University,
Tehran, Iran. abbashajizade@gmail.com.

Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), apotent superantigen, is responsible for many
disorders caused by Staphylococcus aureus. With regard to the appearance of
multidrug-resistant strains of the bacteria, there is a great need to develop an 
efficient vaccine against this pathogen. In the present study, the immunogenicity
of recombinant SEB was evaluated following nasal administration to BABLB/c mice. 
Indeed, the rSEB protein was entrapped into chitosan nanoparticles and the
immunogenicity of nano-formulation was investigated. SEB protein was expressed in
E. coli BL21 (DE3) and purified by using a nickel column. Chitosan nanoparticles 
were synthesized in the presence of rSEB; using the ionic gelation technique.
Synthesized NPs containing rSEB and bare rSEB were administered to mice nasally. 
Serum and stool IgG and IgA antibody showed that both formulations were able to
evoke the mice's immune responses and there was no significant difference between
them. Results of the toxin neutralization test on Vero cells indicated that the
sera of the immunized mice had an inhibitory effect on the growth of these cells 
(p<0.001). Nasal administration of bare rSEB could efficiently simulate the
mice's immune system and nano-delivery of this protein via nasal route had not a 
significant impact on its immunogenicity improvement.

DOI: 10.18502/ijaai.v19i2.2767 
PMID: 32372629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


3. J Microbiol. 2015 May;53(5):306-10. doi: 10.1007/s12275-015-5112-6. Epub 2015 May
3.

Two stress sensor proteins for the expression of sigmaE regulon: DegS and RseB.

Kim DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, 712-749, Korea,
dyokim@ynu.ac.kr.

In E. coli, sigmaE-dependent transcription is controlled by regulated-proteolysis
of RseA. RseA, which holds sigmaE as an anti-sigma factor, is sequentially
digested by DegS, RseP and cytoplasmic proteases to liberate sigmaE in response
to dysfunction in outer-membrane biogenesis. Additionally, the sequential
proteolysis is regulated by RseB binding to RseA (Fig. 1A). Direct interaction
between RseA and RseB inhibits RseA-cleavage by DegS. Both proteolytic activation
of DegS and binding disruption of RseB are thus required to initiate
sigmaE-stress response. For the induction of sigmaEstress response, DegS and RseB
recognize the states of OMP and LPS for outer-membrane biogenesis. DegS is
activated by binding of unfolded OMPs and RseB binding to RseA is antagonized by 
LPS accumulated in periplasm. In this regard, DegS and RseB are proposed to be
stress sensor proteins for sigmaE signal transduction. Interestingly, biogenesis 
of OMP and LPS appears to cross-talk with each other, indicating that dysfunction
of either OMP or LPS can initiate RseA proteolysis. This review aims to briefly
introduce two stress sensor proteins, DegS and RseB, which regulate
sigmaEdependent transcription.

DOI: 10.1007/s12275-015-5112-6 
PMID: 25935301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Science. 2013 May 17;340(6134):837-41. doi: 10.1126/science.1235358.

Dual molecular signals mediate the bacterial response to outer-membrane stress.

Lima S(1), Guo MS, Chaba R, Gross CA, Sauer RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.

In Gram-negative bacteria, outer-membrane integrity is essential for survival and
is monitored by the σ(E) stress-response system, which initiates damage-repair
pathways. One activating signal is unassembled outer-membrane proteins. Using
biochemical and genetic experiments in Escherichia coli, we found that
off-pathway intermediates in lipopolysaccharide transport and assembly provided
an additional required signal. These distinct signals, arising from disruptions
in the transport and assembly of the major outer-membrane components, jointly
determined the rate of proteolytic destruction of a negative regulator of the
σ(E) transcription factor, thereby modulating the expression of stress-response
genes. This dual-signal system permits a rapid response to dysfunction in
outer-membrane biogenesis, while buffering responses to transient fluctuations in
individual components, and may represent a broad strategy for bacteria to monitor
their interface with the environment.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1235358 
PMCID: PMC3928677
PMID: 23687042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2011 Nov;193(22):6179-86. doi: 10.1128/JB.05657-11. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Recognition of β-strand motifs by RseB is required for σ(E) activity in
Escherichia coli.

Kulp A(1), Kuehn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Box 3711, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Gram-negative bacteria react to misfolded proteins in the envelope through a
myriad of different stress response pathways. This cohort of pathways allows the 
bacteria to specifically respond to different types of damage, and many of these 
have been discovered to have key roles in the virulence of bacterial pathogens.
Misfolded outer membrane proteins (OMPs) are typically recognized by the σ(E)
pathway, a highly conserved envelope stress response pathway. We examined the
features of misfolded OMPs with respect to their ability to generate envelope
stress responses. We determined that the secondary structure, particularly the
potential to form β strands, is critical to inducing the σ(E) response in an
RseB-dependent manner. The sequence of the potential β-strand motif modulates the
strength of the σ(E) response generated by the constructs. By understanding the
details of how such stress response pathways are activated, we can gain a greater
understanding of how bacteria survive in harsh environments.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.05657-11 
PMCID: PMC3209223
PMID: 21908666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 1;108(5):2106-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1019277108. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Signal integration by DegS and RseB governs the &#963; E-mediated envelope stress
response in Escherichia coli.

Chaba R(1), Alba BM, Guo MS, Sohn J, Ahuja N, Sauer RT, Gross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. rachnachaba@gmail.com

In Escherichia coli, the σ(E) transcription factor monitors and maintains outer
membrane (OM) integrity by activating genes required for assembly of its two key 
components, outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and by
transcribing small RNAs to down-regulate excess unassembled OMPs. σ(E) activity
is governed by the rate of degradation of its membrane-spanning anti-σ factor,
RseA. Importantly, the DegS protease can initiate RseA cleavage only when
activated by binding to unassembled OMPs. The prevalent paradigm has been that
the σ(E) response is controlled by the amount of activated DegS. Here we
demonstrate that inactivation of a second negative regulator, the periplasmic
protein RseB, is also required for σ(E) induction in vivo. Moreover, OMPs,
previously known only to activate DegS, also generate a signal to antagonize RseB
inhibition. This signal may be lipid related, as RseB is structurally similar to 
proteins that bind lipids. We propose that the use of an AND gate enables σ(E) to
sense and integrate multivariate signals from the envelope.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1019277108 
PMCID: PMC3033255
PMID: 21245315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Protein Sci. 2010 Jun;19(6):1258-63. doi: 10.1002/pro.393.

Structural basis for the negative regulation of bacterial stress response by
RseB.

Kim DY(1), Kwon E, Choi J, Hwang HY, Kim KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

The sigmaE-dependent stress response in bacterial cells is initiated by the DegS-
and RseP-regulated intramembrane proteolysis of a membrane-spanning antisigma
factor, RseA. RseB binds to RseA and inhibits its sequential cleavage, thereby
functioning as a negative modulator of this response. In the crystal structure of
the periplasmic domain of RseA bound to RseB, the DegS cleavage site of RseA is
unstructured, however, its P1 residue is buried in the hydrophobic pocket of
RseB, which suggests that RseB binding blocks the access of DegS to the cleavage 
site.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.393 
PMCID: PMC2895250
PMID: 20512978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 2;22(11):2614-22.

A reducing system of the superoxide sensor SoxR in Escherichia coli.

Koo MS(1), Lee JH, Rah SY, Yeo WS, Lee JW, Lee KL, Koh YS, Kang SO, Roe JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Laboratory of Biophysics, School of
Biological Sciences, and Institute of Microbiology, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The soxRS regulon functions in protecting Escherichia coli cells against
superoxide and nitric oxide. When SoxR is activated by oxidation of its [2Fe-2S] 
cluster, it increases the synthesis of SoxS, which then activates its target gene
expression. How the oxidized SoxR returns to and is maintained in its reduced
state has been under question. To identity genes that constitute the
SoxR-reducing system, we screened an E.coli mutant library carrying a chromosomal
soxSp::lacZ fusion, for constitutive mutants. Mutations mapped to two loci: the
rsxABCDGE operon (named for reducer of SoxR) that is highly homologous to the
rnfABCDGE operon in Rhodobacter capsulatus involved in transferring electrons to 
nitrogenase, and the rseC gene in the rpoE-rseABC operon. In-frame deletion of
each open reading frame in the rsxABCDGE operon produced a similar constitutive
phenotype. The double mutation of rsx and rseC suggested that rsxABCDGE and rseC 
gene products act together in the same pathway in reducing SoxR. Electron
paramagnetic resonance analysis of SoxR and measurement of re-reduction kinetics 
support the proposal that rsx and rseC gene products constitute a reducing system
for SoxR.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg252 
PMCID: PMC156749
PMID: 12773378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rseC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2019 Aug;16(8):590-596. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2018.2598. Epub
2019 May 17.

Identification of Multidrug-Resistant Escherichia coli from Bovine Clinical
Mastitis Using a Ceftiofur-Supplemented Medium.

Locatelli C(1), Barberio A(2), Bonamico S(2), Casula A(1), Moroni P(1)(3), Bronzo
V(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy.
(2)2Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Vicenza, Italy.
(3)3Quality Milk Production Services, Animal Heath Diagnostic Center, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York.

Escherichia coli causes a significant number of clinical mastitis cases in dairy 
cattle worldwide. The antimicrobial susceptibility of E. coli is important for
both human and animal health. Surveillance reports recorded that the efficacy of 
most antibiotics is substantially preserved but detection of E. coli from
clinical mastitis cases producing extended-spectrum beta-lactamases and
plasmid-encoded AmpC beta-lactamases has been reported. These resistance
determinants have frequently been associated with multidrug resistance. The aim
of this study was to determine if a MacConkey agar medium supplemented with 8
mg/L of ceftiofur (MC-CEF) could be a useful tool to identify
cephalosporin-resistant and multidrug-resistant (MDR) E. coli among bovine
mastitis isolates. During the period 2010-2011, 773 E. coli were isolated from
bovine clinical mastitis milk samples collected in 80 dairy farms in Northern
Italy. A total of 105 E. coli were selected and assigned either to group randomly
selected E. coli (RSEC; n = 53), based on a random selection among the whole
collection of 773 E. coli, or to group ceftiofur-resistant E. coli (CEFREC;
n = 52). CEFREC isolates were identified by spreading the 773 E. coli isolates on
MC-CEF. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was used to test the phenotypic
antimicrobial susceptibility to 16 antibiotics. The MIC results confirmed the
ceftiofur resistance in 73.1% (38/52) of CEFREC isolates, whereas all RSEC
isolates were susceptible to ceftiofur. The comparison of MIC values for each
antibiotic tested between the two groups revealed significantly higher
frequencies of resistance to antimicrobials other than ceftiofur in the CEFREC
group. Resistance profiles highlighted a significantly higher frequency of MDR
isolates among CEFREC (73.1%) than RSEC (17%) E. coli. The results showed that
MC-CEF may be a useful selective medium to identify cephalosporin-resistant and
MDR E. coli on dairy farms, without performing MIC on all the isolates.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2018.2598 
PMID: 31099599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiologyopen. 2018 Dec 25:e785. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.785. [Epub ahead of print]

NADPH-related processes studied with a SoxR-based biosensor in Escherichia coli.

Spielmann A(1), Baumgart M(1), Bott M(1).

Author information: 
(1)IBG-1: Biotechnology, Institute of Bio- and Geosciences, Forschungszentrum
Jülich, Jülich, Germany.

NADPH plays a crucial role in cellular metabolism for biosynthesis and oxidative 
stress responses. We previously developed the genetically encoded NADPH biosensor
pSenSox based on the transcriptional regulator SoxR of Escherichia coli, its
target promoter PsoxS and eYFP as fluorescent reporter. Here, we used pSenSox to 
study the influence of various parameters on the sensor output in E. coliduring
reductive biotransformation of methyl acetoacetate (MAA) to (R)-methyl
3-hydroxybutyrate (MHB) by the strictly NADPH-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase of 
Lactobacillus brevis (LbAdh). Redox-cycling drugs such as paraquat and menadione 
strongly activated the NADPH biosensor and mechanisms responsible for this effect
are discussed. Absence of the RsxABCDGE complex and/or RseC caused an enhanced
biosensor response, supporting a function as SoxR-reducing system. Absence of the
membrane-bound transhydrogenase PntAB caused an increased biosensor response,
whereas the lack of the soluble transhydrogenase SthA or of SthA and PntAB was
associated with a strongly decreased response. These data support the opposing
functions of PntAB in NADP+ reduction and of SthA in NADPH oxidation. In summary,
the NADPH biosensor pSenSox proved to be a useful tool to study NADPH-related
processes in E. coli.

© 2018 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.785 
PMCID: PMC6612552
PMID: 30585443 


3. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


4. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 May;74(9):2690-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02809-07. Epub
2008 Mar 14.

The R1 conjugative plasmid increases Escherichia coli biofilm formation through
an envelope stress response.

Yang X(1), Ma Q, Wood TK.

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-3122, USA.

Differential gene expression in biofilm cells suggests that adding the
derepressed conjugative plasmid R1drd19 increases biofilm formation by affecting 
genes related to envelope stress (rseA and cpxAR), biofilm formation (bssR and
cstA), energy production (glpDFK), acid resistance (gadABCEX and hdeABD), and
cell motility (csgBEFG, yehCD, yadC, and yfcV); genes encoding outer membrane
proteins (ompACF), phage shock proteins (pspABCDE), and cold shock proteins
(cspACDEG); and phage-related genes. To investigate the link between the
identified genes and biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19, 40 isogenic 
mutants were classified according to their different biofilm formation
phenotypes. Cells with class I mutations (those in rseA, bssR, cpxA, and ompA)
exhibited no difference from the wild-type strain in biofilm formation and no
increase in biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19. Cells with class II
mutations (those in gatC, yagI, ompC, cspA, pspD, pspB, ymgB, gadC, pspC, ymgA,
slp, cpxP, cpxR, cstA, rseC, ompF, and yqjD) displayed increased biofilm
formation compared to the wild-type strain but decreased biofilm formation upon
the addition of R1drd19. Class III mutants showed increased biofilm formation
compared to the wild-type strain and increased biofilm formation upon the
addition of R1drd19. Cells with class IV mutations displayed increased biofilm
formation compared to the wild-type strain but little difference upon the
addition of R1drd19, and class V mutants exhibited no difference from the
wild-type strain but increased biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19.
Therefore, proteins encoded by the genes corresponding to the class I mutant
phenotype are involved in R1drd19-promoted biofilm formation, primarily through
their impact on cell motility. We hypothesize that the pili formed upon the
addition of the conjugative plasmid disrupt the membrane (induce ompA) and
activate the two-component system CpxAR as well as the other envelope stress
response system, RseA-sigma(E), both of which, along with BssR, play a key role
in bacterial biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02809-07 
PMCID: PMC2394867
PMID: 18344336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 2;22(11):2614-22.

A reducing system of the superoxide sensor SoxR in Escherichia coli.

Koo MS(1), Lee JH, Rah SY, Yeo WS, Lee JW, Lee KL, Koh YS, Kang SO, Roe JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Laboratory of Biophysics, School of
Biological Sciences, and Institute of Microbiology, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The soxRS regulon functions in protecting Escherichia coli cells against
superoxide and nitric oxide. When SoxR is activated by oxidation of its [2Fe-2S] 
cluster, it increases the synthesis of SoxS, which then activates its target gene
expression. How the oxidized SoxR returns to and is maintained in its reduced
state has been under question. To identity genes that constitute the
SoxR-reducing system, we screened an E.coli mutant library carrying a chromosomal
soxSp::lacZ fusion, for constitutive mutants. Mutations mapped to two loci: the
rsxABCDGE operon (named for reducer of SoxR) that is highly homologous to the
rnfABCDGE operon in Rhodobacter capsulatus involved in transferring electrons to 
nitrogenase, and the rseC gene in the rpoE-rseABC operon. In-frame deletion of
each open reading frame in the rsxABCDGE operon produced a similar constitutive
phenotype. The double mutation of rsx and rseC suggested that rsxABCDGE and rseC 
gene products act together in the same pathway in reducing SoxR. Electron
paramagnetic resonance analysis of SoxR and measurement of re-reduction kinetics 
support the proposal that rsx and rseC gene products constitute a reducing system
for SoxR.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg252 
PMCID: PMC156749
PMID: 12773378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. IUBMB Life. 1999 Jul;48(1):49-55.

Identification of a novel cytosolic tocopherol-binding protein: structure,
specificity, and tissue distribution.

Stocker A(1), Zimmer S, Spycher SE, Azzi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bern,
Switzerland.

Alpha-tocopherol plays an important role as a lipid-soluble antioxidant. It is
present in all major mammalian cell types and shows tissue-specific distribution.
This suggests the presence of specific proteins involved in intracellular
distribution or metabolism of alpha-tocopherol. A diminution of tocopherol plasma
concentrations contributes to the development of diseases such as vitamin E
deficiency (AVED), atherosclerosis, and prostate cancer. Further evidence has
been obtained for the existence of sites in cellular metabolism and signal
transduction where alpha-tocopherol potentially plays a regulatory role. A signal
transduction modulation specific for alpha-tocopherol has been described in
several model systems. Using radioactively labeled alpha-tocopherol as tracer, we
have isolated a new alpha-tocopherol-associated protein (TAP) from bovine liver. 
This protein has a molecular mass of 46 kDa and an isoelectric point of 8.1. From
its partial amino acid sequence, a human gene has been identified with high
homology to the newly described protein. Sequence analysis has established that
the new TAP has structural motifs suggesting its belonging to a family of
hydrophobic ligand-binding proteins (RALBP, CRALBP, alpha-TTP, SEC 14, PTN 9,
RSEC 45). Human TAP has been cloned into Escherichia coli, and its
tissue-specific expression has been assessed by Northern blot analysis.

DOI: 10.1080/713803478 
PMID: 10791915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):373-85.

The sigmaE-mediated response to extracytoplasmic stress in Escherichia coli is
transduced by RseA and RseB, two negative regulators of sigmaE.

De Las Peñas A(1), Connolly L, Gross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

The extracytoplasmic stress response in Escherichia coli is controlled by the
alternative sigma factor, sigma(E). sigma(E) activity is uniquely induced by the 
accumulation of outer membrane protein precursors in the periplasmic space, and
leads to the increased production of several proteins, including the periplasmic 
protease DegP, that are thought to be required for maintaining cellular integrity
under stress conditions. Genetic and biochemical experiments show that sigma(E)
activity is under the control of three genes, rseABC (for regulator of sigma E), 
encoded immediately downstream of the sigma factor. Deletion of rseA leads to a
25-fold induction of sigma(E) activity. RseA is predicted to be an inner membrane
protein, and the purified cytoplasmic domain binds to and inhibits
sigma(E)-directed transcription in vitro, indicating that RseA acts as an
anti-sigma factor. Deletion of rseB leads to a slight induction of sigma(E),
indicating that RseB is also a negative regulator of sigma(E). RseB is a
periplasmic protein and was found to co-purify with the periplasmic domain of
RseA, indicating that RseB probably exerts negative activity on sigma(E) through 
RseA. Deletion of rseC, in contrast, has no effect on sigma(E) activity under
steady-state conditions. Under induction conditions, strains lacking RseB and/or 
C show wild-type induction of sigma(E) activity, indicating either the presence
of multiple pathways regulating sigma(E) activity, or the ability of RseA alone
to both sense and transmit information to sigma(E).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3611718.x 
PMID: 9159523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rsmD) AND (rsmD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2021 May 20. pii: pcab060. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcab060. [Epub
ahead of print]

RsmD, a Chloroplast rRNA m2G Methyltransferase, Plays a Role in Cold Stress
Tolerance via Possibly Affecting Chloroplast Translation in Arabidopsis.

Ngoc LNT(1)(2), Park SJ(1), Cai J(1), Huong TT(1)(3), Lee K(1), Kang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, South Korea.
(2)Faculty of Forestry Agriculture, Tay Nguyen University.
(3)The Western Highlands Agriculture and Forestry Science Institute, Buon Ma
Thuot City, DakLak Province 63000, Vietnam.

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) methylation is a pivotal process in the assembly and
activity of ribosomes, which in turn play vital roles in the growth, development,
and stress responses of plants. Although few methyltransferases responsible for
rRNA methylation have been identified in plant chloroplasts, the nature and
function of these enzymes in chloroplasts remain largely unknown. In this study, 
we characterized Arabidopsis RsmD (At3g28460), an ortholog of the
methyltransferase responsible for N2-methylguanosine (m2G) modification of 16S
rRNA in Escherichia coli. Confocal microscopic analysis of an RsmD-GFP fusion
protein revealed that RsmD is localized to chloroplasts. Primer extension
analysis indicated that RsmD is responsible for m2G methylation at position 915
in the 16S rRNA of Arabidopsis chloroplasts. Under cold stress, rsmd mutant
plants exhibited retarded growth, i.e., had shorter roots, lower fresh weight,
and pale-green leaves, compared with wild-type plants. However, these phenotypes 
were not detected in response to drought or salt stress. Notably, the rsmd mutant
was hypersensitive to erythromycin or lincomycin and accumulated fewer
chloroplast proteins compared with the wild type, suggesting that RsmD influences
translation in chloroplasts. Complementation lines expressing RsmD in the rsmd
mutant background recovered wild-type phenotypes. Importantly, RsmD harbored RNA 
methyltransferase activity. Collectively, the findings of this study indicate
that RsmD is a chloroplast 16S rRNA methyltransferase responsible for m2G915
modification that plays a role in the adaptation of Arabidopsis to cold stress.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcab060 
PMID: 34015128 


2. Biochimie. 2015 Oct;117:110-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.11.019. Epub 2014 Dec
13.

What do we know about ribosomal RNA methylation in Escherichia coli?

Sergeeva OV(1), Bogdanov AA(2), Sergiev PV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991,
Russia; Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Moscow 143025,
Russia. Electronic address: olga.sergeeva.v@gmail.com.
(2)Chemistry Department, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991,
Russia; Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow 119991, Russia.

A ribosome is a ribonucleoprotein that performs the synthesis of proteins.
Ribosomal RNA of all organisms includes a number of modified nucleotides, such as
base or ribose methylated and pseudouridines. Methylated nucleotides are highly
conserved in bacteria and some even universally. In this review we discuss
available data on a set of modification sites in the most studied bacteria,
Escherichia coli. While most rRNA modification enzymes are known for this
organism, the function of the modified nucleotides is rarely identified.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.11.019 
PMID: 25511423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci Rep. 2013 Nov 18;3:3236. doi: 10.1038/srep03236.

Modified nucleotides m(2)G966/m(5)C967 of Escherichia coli 16S rRNA are required 
for attenuation of tryptophan operon.

Prokhorova IV(1), Osterman IA, Burakovsky DE, Serebryakova MV, Galyamina MA,
Pobeguts OV, Altukhov I, Kovalchuk S, Alexeev DG, Govorun VM, Bogdanov AA,
Sergiev PV, Dontsova OA.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Chemistry and A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical
Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119899, Russia [2].

Ribosomes contain a number of modifications in rRNA, the function of which is
unclear. Here we show--using proteomic analysis and dual fluorescence reporter in
vivo assays--that m(2)G966 and m(5)C967 in 16S rRNA of Escherichia coli ribosomes
are necessary for correct attenuation of tryptophan (trp) operon. Expression of
trp operon is upregulated in the strain where RsmD and RsmB methyltransferases
were deleted, which results in the lack of m(2)G966 and m(5)C967 modifications.
The upregulation requires the trpL attenuator, but is independent of the promotor
of trp operon, ribosome binding site of the trpE gene, which follows trp
attenuator and even Trp codons in the trpL sequence. Suboptimal translation
initiation efficiency in the rsmB/rsmD knockout strain is likely to cause a delay
in translation relative to transcription which causes misregulation of
attenuation control of trp operon.

DOI: 10.1038/srep03236 
PMCID: PMC3831192
PMID: 24241179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Aug;57(8):3843-56. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02264-12.
Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Molecular characterization of an rsmD-like rRNA methyltransferase from the
Wolbachia endosymbiont of Brugia malayi and antifilarial activity of specific
inhibitors of the enzyme.

Rana AK(1), Chandra S, Siddiqi MI, Misra-Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India.

The endosymbiotic organism Wolbachia is an attractive antifilarial drug target.
Here we report on the cloning and expression of an rsmD-like rRNA
methyltransferase from the Wolbachia endosymbiont of Brugia malayi, its molecular
properties, and assays for specific inhibitors. The gene was found to be
expressed in all the major life stages of B. malayi. The purified enzyme
expressed in Escherichia coli was found to be in monomer form in its native
state. The activities of the specific inhibitors (heteroaryl compounds) against
the enzyme were tested with B. malayi adult and microfilariae for 7 days in vitro
at various concentrations, and NSC-659390 proved to be the most potent compound
(50% inhibitory concentration [IC50], 0.32 μM), followed by NSC-658343 (IC50,
4.13 μM) and NSC-657589 (IC50, 7.5 μM). On intraperitoneal administration at 5
mg/kg of body weight for 7 days to adult jirds into which B. malayi had been
transplanted intraperitoneally, all the compounds killed a significant proportion
of the implanted worms. A very similar result was observed in infected mastomys
when inhibitors were administered. Docking studies of enzyme and inhibitors and
an in vitro tryptophan quenching experiment were also performed to understand the
binding mode and affinity. The specific inhibitors of the enzyme showed a higher 
affinity for the catalytic site of the enzyme than the nonspecific inhibitors and
were found to be potent enough to kill the worm (both adults and microfilariae)
in vitro as well as in vivo in a matter of days at micromolar concentrations. The
findings suggest that these compounds be evaluated against other pathogens
possessing a methyltransferase with a DPPY motif and warrant the design and
synthesis of more such inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02264-12 
PMCID: PMC3719755
PMID: 23733469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2013 Aug;195(16):3524-30. doi: 10.1128/JB.00455-13. Epub 2013 May
31.

Role of the ribosomal P-site elements of m²G966, m⁵C967, and the S9 C-terminal
tail in maintenance of the reading frame during translational elongation in
Escherichia coli.

Arora S(1), Bhamidimarri SP, Weber MH, Varshney U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

The ribosomal P-site hosts the peptidyl-tRNAs during translation elongation.
Which P-site elements support these tRNA species to maintain codon-anticodon
interactions has remained unclear. We investigated the effects of P-site features
of methylations of G966, C967, and the conserved C-terminal tail sequence of Ser,
Lys, and Arg (SKR) of the S9 ribosomal protein in maintenance of the
translational reading frame of an mRNA. We generated Escherichia coli strains
deleted for the SKR sequence in S9 ribosomal protein, RsmB (which methylates
C967), and RsmD (which methylates G966) and used them to translate LacZ from its 
+1 and -1 out-of-frame constructs. We show that the S9 SKR tail prevents both the
+1 and -1 frameshifts and plays a general role in holding the P-site
tRNA/peptidyl-tRNA in place. In contrast, the G966 and C967 methylations did not 
make a direct contribution to the maintenance of the translational frame of an
mRNA. However, deletion of rsmB in the S9Δ3 background caused significantly
increased -1 frameshifting at 37°C. Interestingly, the effects of the deficiency 
of C967 methylation were annulled when the E. coli strain was grown at 30°C,
supporting its context-dependent role.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00455-13 
PMCID: PMC3754560
PMID: 23729652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May;41(9):4963-75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt175. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Distinctive contributions of the ribosomal P-site elements m2G966, m5C967 and the
C-terminal tail of the S9 protein in the fidelity of initiation of translation in
Escherichia coli.

Arora S(1), Bhamidimarri SP, Bhattacharyya M, Govindan A, Weber MH, Vishveshwara 
S, Varshney U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India.

The accuracy of pairing of the anticodon of the initiator tRNA (tRNA(fMet)) and
the initiation codon of an mRNA, in the ribosomal P-site, is crucial for
determining the translational reading frame. However, a direct role of any
ribosomal element(s) in scrutinizing this pairing is unknown. The P-site
elements, m(2)G966 (methylated by RsmD), m(5)C967 (methylated by RsmB) and the
C-terminal tail of the protein S9 lie in the vicinity of tRNA(fMet). We
investigated the role of these elements in initiation from various codons,
namely, AUG, GUG, UUG, CUG, AUA, AUU, AUC and ACG with tRNA(fMet(CAU) (tRNA(fMet)
with CAU anticodon); CAC and CAU with tRNA(fMet(GUG); UAG with tRNA(fMet(CAU) ;
UAC with tRNA(fMet(GUG) ; and AUC with tRNA(fMet(GUG) using in vivo and
computational methods. Although RsmB deficiency did not impact initiation from
most codons, RsmD deficiency increased initiation from AUA, CAC and CAU (2- to
3.6-fold). Deletion of the S9 C-terminal tail resulted in poorer initiation from 
UUG, GUG and CUG, but in increased initiation from CAC, CAU and UAC codons (up to
4-fold). Also, the S9 tail suppressed initiation with tRNA(fMet(CAU) lacking the 
3GC base pairs in the anticodon stem. These observations suggest distinctive
roles of 966/967 methylations and the S9 tail in initiation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt175 
PMCID: PMC3643588
PMID: 23530111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. RNA. 2012 Jun;18(6):1178-85. doi: 10.1261/rna.032763.112. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Properties of small rRNA methyltransferase RsmD: mutational and kinetic study.

Sergeeva OV(1), Prokhorova IV, Ordabaev Y, Tsvetkov PO, Sergiev PV, Bogdanov AA, 
Makarov AA, Dontsova OA.

Author information: 
(1)Lomonosov Moscow State University, Department of Chemistry and A.N. Belozersky
Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow 119992, Russia.

Ribosomal RNA modification is accomplished by a variety of enzymes acting on all 
stages of ribosome assembly. Among rRNA methyltransferases of Escherichia coli,
RsmD deserves special attention. Despite its minimalistic domain architecture, it
is able to recognize a single target nucleotide G966 of the 16S rRNA. RsmD acts
late in the assembly process and is able to modify a completely assembled 30S
subunit. Here, we show that it possesses superior binding properties toward the
unmodified 30S subunit but is unable to bind a 30S subunit modified at G966. RsmD
is unusual in its ability to withstand multiple amino acid substitutions of the
active site. Such efficiency of RsmD may be useful to complete the modification
of a 30S subunit ahead of the 30S subunit's involvement in translation.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.032763.112 
PMCID: PMC3358640
PMID: 22535590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19652-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200428. Epub 2011
Apr 7.

Structural and functional characterization of Rv2966c protein reveals an
RsmD-like methyltransferase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the role of its
N-terminal domain in target recognition.

Kumar A(1), Saigal K, Malhotra K, Sinha KM, Taneja B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research), Delhi, India.

Nine of ten methylated nucleotides of Escherichia coli 16 S rRNA are conserved in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. All the 10 different methyltransferases are known in 
E. coli, whereas only TlyA and GidB have been identified in mycobacteria. Here we
have identified Rv2966c of M. tuberculosis as an ortholog of RsmD protein of E.
coli. We have shown that rv2966c can complement rsmD-deleted E. coli cells.
Recombinant Rv2966c can use 30 S ribosomes purified from rsmD-deleted E. coli as 
substrate and methylate G966 of 16 S rRNA in vitro. Structure determination of
the protein shows the protein to be a two-domain structure with a short hairpin
domain at the N terminus and a C-terminal domain with the
S-adenosylmethionine-MT-fold. We show that the N-terminal hairpin is a minimalist
functional domain that helps Rv2966c in target recognition. Deletion of the
N-terminal domain prevents binding to nucleic acid substrates, and the truncated 
protein fails to carry out the m(2)G966 methylation on 16 S rRNA. The N-terminal 
domain also binds DNA efficiently, a property that may be utilized under specific
conditions of cellular growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200428 
PMCID: PMC3103344
PMID: 21474448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(7):2295-301. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

Ribosomal RNA guanine-(N2)-methyltransferases and their targets.

Sergiev PV(1), Bogdanov AA, Dontsova OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical
Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.

Five nearly universal methylated guanine-(N2) residues are present in bacterial
rRNA in the ribosome. To date four out of five ribosomal RNA
guanine-(N2)-methyltransferases are described. RsmC(YjjT) methylates G1207 of the
16S rRNA. RlmG(YgjO) and RlmL(YcbY) are responsible for the 23S rRNA m(2)G1835
and m(2)G2445 formation, correspondingly. RsmD(YhhF) is necessary for methylation
of G966 residue of 16S rRNA. Structure of Escherichia coli RsmD(YhhF)
methyltransferase and the structure of the Methanococcus jannaschii RsmC ortholog
were determined. All ribosomal guanine-(N2)-methyltransferases have similar
AdoMet-binding sites. In relation to the ribosomal substrate recognition, two
enzymes that recognize assembled subunits are relatively small single domain
proteins and two enzymes that recognize naked rRNA are larger proteins containing
separate methyltransferase- and RNA-binding domains. The model for recognition of
specific target nucleotide is proposed. The hypothetical role of the m(2)G
residues in rRNA is discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm104 
PMCID: PMC1874633
PMID: 17389639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 23;282(8):5880-7. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Methyltransferase that modifies guanine 966 of the 16 S rRNA: functional
identification and tertiary structure.

Lesnyak DV(1), Osipiuk J, Skarina T, Sergiev PV, Bogdanov AA, Edwards A,
Savchenko A, Joachimiak A, Dontsova OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, Moscow State University,
Moscow 119992, Russia.

N(2)-Methylguanine 966 is located in the loop of Escherichia coli 16 S rRNA helix
31, forming a part of the P-site tRNA-binding pocket. We found yhhF to be a gene 
encoding for m(2)G966 specific 16 S rRNA methyltransferase. Disruption of the
yhhF gene by kanamycin resistance marker leads to a loss of modification at G966.
The modification could be rescued by expression of recombinant protein from the
plasmid carrying the yhhF gene. Moreover, purified m(2)G966 methyltransferase, in
the presence of S-adenosylomethionine (AdoMet), is able to methylate 30 S
ribosomal subunits that were purified from yhhF knock-out strain in vitro. The
methylation is specific for G966 base of the 16 S rRNA. The m(2)G966
methyltransferase was crystallized, and its structure has been determined and
refined to 2.05A(.) The structure closely resembles RsmC rRNA methyltransferase, 
specific for m(2)G1207 of the 16 S rRNA. Structural comparisons and analysis of
the enzyme active site suggest modes for binding AdoMet and rRNA to m(2)G966
methyltransferase. Based on the experimental data and current nomenclature the
protein expressed from the yhhF gene was renamed to RsmD. A model for interaction
of RsmD with ribosome has been proposed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M608214200 
PMCID: PMC2885967
PMID: 17189261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((sdiA) AND (ddlB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(7):2265-72.

Global impact of sdiA amplification revealed by comprehensive gene expression
profiling of Escherichia coli.

Wei Y(1), Lee JM, Smulski DR, LaRossa RA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, DuPont Company, Wilmington, Delaware
19880-0173, USA.

In Escherichia coli the amplification of sdiA, a positive activator of ftsQAZ,
genes that are essential for septation, results in mitomycin C resistance. To
help us understand this resistance phenotype, genes whose expression was altered 
by increased sdiA dosage were identified using a DNA microarray-based,
comprehensive transcript profiling method. The expression of 62 genes was reduced
by more than threefold; of these, 41 are involved in motility and chemotaxis.
Moreover, the expression of 75 genes, 36 of which had been previously
characterized, was elevated at least threefold. As expected, increased sdiA
dosage led to significantly elevated sdiA and 'ddlB-ftsQAZ-lpxC operon
expression. Transcription of two genes, uvrY and uvrC, located downstream of sdiA
and oriented in the same direction, was elevated about 10-fold, although the
intervening gene, yecF, of opposite polarity was unaffected by increased sdiA
dosage. Three genes (mioC and gidAB) flanking the replication origin, oriC, were 
transcribed more often when sdiA dosage was high, as were 12 genes within 1 min
of a terminus of replication, terB. Transcription of the acrABDEF genes, mapping 
in three widely spaced loci, was elevated significantly, while several genes
involved in DNA repair and replication (e.g., nei, recN, mioC, and mcrC) were
moderately elevated in expression. Such global analysis provides a link between
septation and the response to DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.7.2265-2272.2001 
PMCID: PMC95133
PMID: 11244066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((sdiA) AND (lpxC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(7):2265-72.

Global impact of sdiA amplification revealed by comprehensive gene expression
profiling of Escherichia coli.

Wei Y(1), Lee JM, Smulski DR, LaRossa RA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, DuPont Company, Wilmington, Delaware
19880-0173, USA.

In Escherichia coli the amplification of sdiA, a positive activator of ftsQAZ,
genes that are essential for septation, results in mitomycin C resistance. To
help us understand this resistance phenotype, genes whose expression was altered 
by increased sdiA dosage were identified using a DNA microarray-based,
comprehensive transcript profiling method. The expression of 62 genes was reduced
by more than threefold; of these, 41 are involved in motility and chemotaxis.
Moreover, the expression of 75 genes, 36 of which had been previously
characterized, was elevated at least threefold. As expected, increased sdiA
dosage led to significantly elevated sdiA and 'ddlB-ftsQAZ-lpxC operon
expression. Transcription of two genes, uvrY and uvrC, located downstream of sdiA
and oriented in the same direction, was elevated about 10-fold, although the
intervening gene, yecF, of opposite polarity was unaffected by increased sdiA
dosage. Three genes (mioC and gidAB) flanking the replication origin, oriC, were 
transcribed more often when sdiA dosage was high, as were 12 genes within 1 min
of a terminus of replication, terB. Transcription of the acrABDEF genes, mapping 
in three widely spaced loci, was elevated significantly, while several genes
involved in DNA repair and replication (e.g., nei, recN, mioC, and mcrC) were
moderately elevated in expression. Such global analysis provides a link between
septation and the response to DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.7.2265-2272.2001 
PMCID: PMC95133
PMID: 11244066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((sdiA) AND (sdiA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2021 Jul 1. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2021.0012. [Epub ahead of
print]

Lactic Acid and Peroxyacetic Acid Inhibit Biofilm of Escherichia coli O157:H7
Formed in Beef Extract.

Liu Y(1)(2), Wu L(1)(2), Yan Y(1)(2), Yang K(1)(2), Dong P(1)(2), Luo X(1)(2),
Zhang Y(1)(2), Zhu L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Beef Processing and Quality Control, College of Food Science and
Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong, China.
(2)National R&D Center for Beef Processing Technology, Tai'an, Shan, China.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the inhibitory effect of lactic acid 
(LA) and peroxyacetic acid (PAA) on the biofilm formation of Escherichia coli
O157:H7 in beef extract (BE). BE medium was used as the growth substrate in this 
study, to make the control effect closer to the situation of the factory. The
biofilm inhibitory efficacy of LA and PAA was tested by using a crystal violet
staining assay and microscopic examination. And then, extracellular polymeric
substance (EPS) production, metabolic activity, and real-time polymerase chain
reaction assay were used to reveal the biofilm inhibition mechanism of LA and
PAA. The results showed that both LA and PAA significantly inhibited biofilm
formation of E. coli O157:H7 at minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs)
(p < 0.05). At MIC, LA and PAA showed different effects on the biofilm metabolic 
activity and the EPS production of E. coli O157:H7. Supporting these findings,
expression analysis showed that LA significantly suppressed quorum sensing genes 
(luxS and sdiA) and adhesion genes (flhC), while PAA downregulated the
transcription of extracellular polysaccharide synthesis genes (adrB and adrA) and
the global regulatory factor csgD. This result revealed that LA and PAA had
different biofilm inhibitory mechanisms on E. coli O157:H7; LA inhibited the
biofilm formation mainly by inhibiting metabolic activity, while PAA inhibited
EPS production. This study provided a theoretical basis for the control of E.
coli O157:H7 biofilm in the actual production process.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2021.0012 
PMID: 34197219 


2. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Sep 10;786:147464. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.147464. 
Epub 2021 May 1.

Hormetic dose-responses for silver antibacterial compounds, quorum sensing
inhibitors, and their binary mixtures on bacterial resistance of Escherichia
coli.

Shen H(1), Liu Y(2), Liu Y(1), Duan Z(1), Wu P(3), Lin Z(4), Sun H(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Science
and Technology, Shijiazhuang 050018, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology, Beijing 
Normal University, Beijing 100875, China.
(3)Huaxin College of Hebei Geo University, Shijiazhuang 050700, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China;
Shanghai Key Lab of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China;
Shanghai Key Lab of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Shanghai, China;
Post-doctoral Research Station, College of Civil Engineering, Tongji University, 
Shanghai 200092, China. Electronic address: sunhaoyu2015@tongji.edu.cn.

Silver antibacterial compounds (SACs) and quorum sensing inhibitors (QSIs), as
the potential antibiotic substitutes, have been recommended to prevent and treat 
microbial infections for the purpose of controlling the increasingly serious
bacterial resistance induced by the abuse of antibiotics. However, there is
little information regarding the resistance risk of these compounds, especially
their mixtures. In this study, bacterial mutation and RP4 plasmid conjugative
transfer among bacteria were used to characterize the bacterial endogenous and
exogenous resistance, respectively. The effects of SACs (including silver nitrate
(AgNO3) and silver nanoparticle (AgNP)), QSIs, and their binary mixtures on the
bacterial resistance were investigated via setting the frequency of mutation and 
conjugative transfer in Escherichia coli (E. coli) as the test endpoints. The
results indicated that these two endpoints exhibited hormetic dose-responses to
each treatment. Furthermore, the joint resistance actions between SACs and QSIs
were all judged to be antagonism. Correlation analysis suggested that the
promotion of the bacterial resistance in each treatment was closely related to
its toxicity. It was speculated that AgNO3 and AgNP might both release Ag+ ions
to facilitate the E. coli resistance, while QSIs probably acted on LsrR and SdiA 
proteins to stimulate the bacterial mutation and accelerate the RP4 plasmid
conjugative transfer, respectively. These findings imply that the bacteria may
generate targeted stress response to the survival pressure from environmental
compounds, displaying hormetic phenomenon in resistance-related test endpoints.
This study provides a new insight into the resistance risk induced by SACs and
QSIs, benefiting the environmental risk assessment of these compounds from the
perspective of bacterial resistance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.147464 
PMID: 33965827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


3. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2021 Apr 20;PP. doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2021.3074567. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular simulations and Markov state modeling reveal inactive form of quorum
sensing regulator SdiA of Escherichia coli.

Grabski H, Ginosyan S, Tiratsuyan S.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli remains one of the most important pathogens
infecting children as well as it causes persistent diarrhea worldwide. Bacteria
communicate with each other through the quorum sensing system with the ability to
respond to chemical molecules known as autoinducers. Quorum sensing in E. coli
regulates the expression of virulence factors and biofilm formation. Suppressor
of division inhibitor (SdiA) is a quorum sensing receptor present in \textit{E.
coli}. Sdia is regulated by 1-octanoyl-rac-glycerol, which serves as an energy
source, signaling molecule, and substrate for membrane biogenesis. Sdia can also 
detect acyl-homoserine lactone type autoinducers produced by other bacterial
species. SdiA can be a potential target, but current crystallographic structures 
for virtual screening may not be sufficient for molecular docking, because the
structures are in the active form. It has been shown that SdiA protein is not
activated without a ligand, which binds to the ligand-binding domain. We find an 
unknown conformation after 24 independent molecular dynamics simulation runs
(aggregate of 12 's) with random initial velocities and Markov state modeling. In
summary, this unknown conformation could be the structure of the inactive form
without a ligand. The obtained structure could be used for virtual screening.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2021.3074567 
PMID: 33877985 


4. J Food Prot. 2021 Jun 1;84(6):1060-1068. doi: 10.4315/JFP-20-385.

Beef-Based Medium Influences Biofilm Formation of Escherichia coli O157:H7
Isolated from Beef Processing Plants.

Wu L(1), Liu Y(1), Dong P(1), Zhang Y(1), Mao Y(1), Liang R(1), Yang X(1), Zhu
L(1), Luo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Beef Processing and Quality Control, College of Food Science and
Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, Shandong, 271018, People's 
Republic of China.

ABSTRACT: Beef-based medium beef extract (BE) and standard medium tryptic soy
broth (TSB) are used as minimally processed food models to study the effects on
Escherichia coli O157:H7 biofilm formation. The effects of temperatures (4, 10,
25, 37, and 42°C), pH values (4.5, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 7.0, and 8.0), strain
characteristics, and the expression of functional genes on the biofilm formation 
ability of the bacteria were determined. The three tested E. coli O157:H7 strains
produced biofilm in both media. Biofilm formation was greater in BE than in TSB
(P < 0.05). The strongest biofilm formation capacity of E. coli O157:H7 was
achieved at 37°C and pH 7.0. Biofilm formation was significantly inhibited for
three tested strains incubated at 4°C. Biofilm formation ability was correlated
with swarming in TSB. Biofilm formation was significantly and positively
correlated with autoaggregation or hydrophobicity in BE (P < 0.05). At the
initial stage of biofilm formation, the expressions of luxS, sdiA, csgD, csgA,
flhC, adrA, and rpoS were significantly higher in BE than in TSB (P < 0.05). At
the maturity stage, the expressions of luxS, sdiA, csgD, csgA, flhC, csrA, adrB, 
adrA, iraM, and rpoS were significantly higher in TSB than in BE (P < 0.05). Such
information could help in the development of effective biofilm removal
technologies to deal with risks of E. coli O157:H7 biofilms in the beef industry.
HIGHLIGHTS:

Copyright ©, International Association for Food Protection.

DOI: 10.4315/JFP-20-385 
PMID: 33508090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Chemosphere. 2021 Feb;265:129153. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.129153. Epub
2020 Dec 1.

Resistance risk induced by quorum sensing inhibitors and their combined use with 
antibiotics: Mechanism and its relationship with toxicity.

Li X(1), Liu Y(2), Wang Y(1), Lin Z(3), Wang D(4), Sun H(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200092,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology, Beijing 
Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200092,
China; Shanghai Key Lab of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Shanghai,
China.
(4)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health, School of
Environment, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 511443, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200092,
China; Shanghai Key Lab of Chemical Assessment and Sustainability, Shanghai,
China; Post-doctoral Research Station, College of Civil Engineering, Tongji
University, Shanghai, 200092, China. Electronic address:
sunhaoyu2015@tongji.edu.cn.

The abuse of antibiotics has brought out serious bacterial resistance, which
threatens the ecological environment and human health. Quorum sensing inhibitors 
(QSIs), as a new kind of potential antibiotic substitutes that are theoretically 
difficult to trigger bacterial resistance, are recommended to individually use or
jointly use with traditional antibiotics. However, there are few studies on the
resistance risk in the use of QSIs. In this study, the influence of QSIs alone or
in combination with sulfonamides (SAs) on conjugative transfer and mutation of
Escherichia coli (E. coli) was investigated to explore whether QSIs have the
potential to induce bacterial resistance. The results show that QSIs may
facilitate plasmid RP4 conjugative transfer by binding with SdiA protein to
regulate pilus expression, and interact with LsrR protein to increase SOS gene
expression, inducing gene mutation. The QSIs-SAs mixtures could promote plasmid
RP4 conjugative transfer and mutation in E. coli, and the main joint effects are 
synergism and antagonism. Furthermore, there is a good correlation among
conjugative transfer, mutation, and growth inhibition of QSIs-SAs to E. coli. It 
could be speculated that bacteria may delay cell division to provide sufficient
energy and time for regulating conjugative transfer and mutation under the stress
of QSIs and their combined exposure with antibiotics, which is essentially a
balance between bacterial resistance and toxicity. This study provides a
reference for the resistance risk assessment of QSIs and benefits the clinical
application of QSIs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.129153 
PMID: 33302207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


6. J Bacteriol. 2021 Jan 25;203(4). pii: e00510-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00510-20. Print 
2021 Jan 25.

Regulatory Cross Talk between Motility and Interbacterial Communication in
Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium.

Plitnick J(1), Chevance FFV(2), Stringer A(1), Hughes KT(2), Wade JT(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York, USA.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York, USA
joseph.wade@health.ny.gov.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health, University at
Albany, Albany, New York, USA.

FliA is a broadly conserved σ factor that directs transcription of genes involved
in flagellar motility. We previously identified FliA-transcribed genes in
Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, and we showed that 
E. coli FliA transcribes many unstable, noncoding RNAs from intragenic promoters.
Here, we show that FliA in S Typhimurium also directs the transcription of large 
numbers of unstable, noncoding RNAs from intragenic promoters, and we identify
two previously unreported FliA-transcribed protein-coding genes. One of these
genes, sdiA, encodes a transcription factor that responds to quorum-sensing
signals produced by other bacteria. We show that FliA-dependent transcription of 
sdiA is required for SdiA activity, highlighting a regulatory link between
flagellar motility and intercellular communication.IMPORTANCE Initiation of
bacterial transcription requires association of a σ factor with the core RNA
polymerase to facilitate sequence-specific recognition of promoter elements. FliA
is a widely conserved σ factor that directs transcription of genes involved in
flagellar motility. We previously showed that Escherichia coli FliA transcribes
many unstable, noncoding RNAs from promoters within genes. Here, we demonstrate
the same phenomenon in Salmonella Typhimurium. We also show that S Typhimurium
FliA directs transcription of the sdiA gene, which encodes a transcription factor
that responds to quorum-sensing signals produced by other bacteria.
FliA-dependent transcription of sdiA is required for transcriptional control of
SdiA target genes, highlighting a regulatory link between flagellar motility and 
intercellular communication.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00510-20 
PMCID: PMC7847542
PMID: 33257526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 Dec 11;6(12):3092-3103. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00654.
Epub 2020 Oct 30.

Chemical Control of Quorum Sensing in E. coli: Identification of Small Molecule
Modulators of SdiA and Mechanistic Characterization of a Covalent Inhibitor.

Styles MJ(1), Early SA(1), Tucholski T(1), West KHJ(1), Ge Y(1)(2), Blackwell
HE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1101 University
Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.
(2)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Wisconsin Institute for Medical
Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison,
Wisconsin 53705, United States.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) is the causative agent of severe
diarrheal disease in humans. Cattle are the natural reservoir of EHEC, and
approximately 75% of EHEC infections in humans stem from bovine products. Many
common bacterial pathogens, including EHEC, rely on chemical communication
systems, such as quorum sensing (QS), to regulate virulence and facilitate host
colonization. EHEC uses SdiA from E. coli (SdiAEC), an orphan LuxR-type receptor,
to sense N-acyl l-homoserine lactone (AHL) QS signals produced by other members
of the bovine enteric microbiome. SdiAEC regulates two phenotypes critical for
colonizing cattle: acid resistance and the formation of attaching and effacing
lesions. Despite the importance of SdiAEC, there is very little known about its
selectivity for different AHL signals, and no chemical inhibitors that act
specifically on SdiAEC have been reported. Such compounds would represent
valuable tools to study the roles of QS in EHEC virulence. To identify chemical
modulators of SdiAEC and delineate the structure-activity relationships (SARs)
for AHL activity in this receptor, we report herein the screening of a focused
library composed largely of AHLs and AHL analogues in an SdiAEC reporter assay.
We describe the identity and SARs of potent modulators of SdiAEC activity,
examine the promiscuity of SdiAEC, characterize the mechanism of a covalent
inhibitor, and provide phenotypic assay data to support that these compounds can 
control SdiAEC-dependent acid resistance in E. coli. These SdiAEC modulators
could be used to advance the study of LuxR-type receptor/ligand interactions, the
biological roles of orphan LuxR-type receptors, and potential QS-based
therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00654 
PMCID: PMC7736514
PMID: 33124430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jun 3;11:1078. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01078. eCollection
2020.

SdiA Improves the Acid Tolerance of E. coli by Regulating GadW and GadY
Expression.

Ma X(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(3), Xu Z(1)(3), Li H(1)(3), Xiao Q(1), Qiu F(4), Zhang
W(1), Long Y(1), Zheng D(1), Huang B(2), Chen C(1), Lu Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)The Second Clinical College, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanhai Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Foshan, China.

The acid tolerance mechanism is important for Escherichia coli to resist acidic
conditions encountered in mammalian host digestive tract environment. Here, we
explored how the LuxR protein SdiA influenced E. coli acid tolerance ability in
the context of the glutamate- and glutamine-dependent acid resistance system
(AR2). First, using a growth and acid shock assay under different acid stresses, 
we demonstrated that the deletion of sdiA in SM10λpir or BW25113 led to impaired 
growth under the acidic environment of pH 3-6, which was restored by
complementary expression of SdiA. Next, transcriptome sequencing and qPCR
disclosed that the expression of glutamate decarboxylase W (GadW) and GadY, the
key members of the AR2 system, were regulated by SdiA. Further, β-galactosidase
reporter assays showed that the promoter activity of gadW and gadY was positively
regulated by SdiA. Moreover, qPCR and β-galactosidase reporter assays confirmed
that the regulation of SdiA on GadW, but not GadY, could be enhanced by quorum
sensing (QS) signal molecules AHLs. Collectively, these data suggest that SdiA
plays a crucial role in acid tolerance regulation of E. coli. Our findings
provide new insights into the important contribution of quorum sensing system
AHLs-SdiA to the networks that regulate acid tolerance.

Copyright © 2020 Ma, Zhang, Xu, Li, Xiao, Qiu, Zhang, Long, Zheng, Huang, Chen
and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01078 
PMCID: PMC7286202
PMID: 32582066 


9. In Vivo. 2020 Jan-Feb;34(1):65-71. doi: 10.21873/invivo.11746.

The Role of Efflux Pumps and Environmental pH in Bacterial Multidrug Resistance.

Nové M(1), Kincses A(1), Molnár J(1), Amaral L(1)(2), Spengler G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Travel Medicine, Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Universidade Nova
de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary spengler.gabriella@med.u-szeged.hu.

BACKGROUND/AIM: One of the most studied bacterial resistance mechanisms is the
resistance related to multidrug efflux pumps. In our study the pump activity of
the Escherichia coli K-12 AG100 strain expressing the AcrAB-TolC pump system was 
investigated at pH 7 and pH 5 in the presence of the efflux pump inhibitor (EPI) 
promethazine (PMZ).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The EPI activity was assessed by real-time fluorimetry.
The influence of PMZ treatment on the relative expression of the pump genes acrA,
acrB and their regulators marA, marB, marR, the stress genes soxS, rob, as well
as the bacterial growth control genes ftsI, and sdiA were determined by RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: The EPI activity of PMZ was more effective at neutral pH. The PMZ
treatment induced a significant stress response in the bacterium at acidic pH by 
the up-regulation of genes.
CONCLUSION: The genetic system that regulates the activity of the main efflux
pump is pH-dependent.

Copyright© 2020, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/invivo.11746 
PMCID: PMC6984089
PMID: 31882464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Microbiol. 2019 Nov 13;10:2584. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02584. eCollection 
2019.

Inhibitory Effect of Two Traditional Chinese Medicine Monomers, Berberine and
Matrine, on the Quorum Sensing System of Antimicrobial-Resistant Escherichia
coli.

Sun T(1), Li XD(1), Hong J(1), Liu C(1), Zhang XL(1), Zheng JP(1), Xu YJ(1), Ou
ZY(1), Zheng JL(1), Yu DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine and Animal
Health, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.

The quorum sensing (QS) system controls bacterial biofilm formation, which is
highly related to the virulence and resistance of pathogens. In the present
study, the effect of two traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) monomers, berberine
and matrine, on biofilm formation and QS-related gene expression of
antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) Escherichia coli strains was investigated by laser 
scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM) observation and real-time PCR. The results
indicated a roughly positive relationship between biofilm formation ability and
antimicrobial resistance. LSCM observation showed that berberine and matrine
inhibited biofilm formation of AMR E. coli strains at 1/2 minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC) (1/2 MIC berberine at OD630: 0.1020; 1/2 MIC matrine: OD630: 
0.1045); furthermore, abnormal cell morphology such as rounded and elongated
cells was also observed. This finding was consistent with the downregulation of
QS-related genes: luxS, pfS, sdiA, hflX, motA, and fliA. At 1/2 MIC and 1/4 MIC
concentrations of berberine, a significant downregulation of luxS, pfS, hflX,
ftsQ, and ftsE was observed. The results indicate that berberine and matrine can 
inhibit biofilm formation by inhibiting the QS system and that berberine is more 
effective than matrine.

Copyright © 2019 Sun, Li, Hong, Liu, Zhang, Zheng, Xu, Ou, Zheng and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02584 
PMCID: PMC6863804
PMID: 31798551 


############# ((slyA) AND (slyA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2021 May 13;10(19). pii: e00294-21. doi:
10.1128/MRA.00294-21.

Transcriptome RNA Sequencing Data Set of Differential Gene Expression in
Escherichia coli BW25113 Wild-Type and slyA Mutant Strains.

Ojo O(1)(2), Scott D(3), Iwalokun B(2), Odetoyin B(4), Grove A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, Albany State University, Albany, Georgia, USA 
olabisi.ojo@asurams.edu.
(2)Division of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Nigerian Institute of Medical
Research, Lagos, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware,
USA.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Obafemi Awolowo
University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, USA.

Escherichia coli laboratory strains remain instrumental for the development of
tools and techniques in molecular microbiology. The transcriptional regulator
SlyA, associated with host-derived oxidative stress, antibiotic resistance, and
virulence, is prominent in Enterobacteriaceae Here, we announce a transcriptome
data set detailing the global gene expression in E. coli BW25113 and its slyA
mutant.

Copyright © 2021 Ojo et al.

DOI: 10.1128/MRA.00294-21 
PMCID: PMC8142576
PMID: 33986090 


2. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 4;11:1856. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01856. eCollection
2020.

SlyA Transcriptional Regulator Is Not Directly Affected by ppGpp Levels.

Bartoli J(1), Viala JP(1), Bouveret E(2).

Author information: 
(1)LISM, Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée, CNRS, Aix-Marseille
University, Marseille, France.
(2)SAMe Unit, Microbiology Department, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France.

The SlyA transcriptional regulator controls the expression of genes involved in
virulence and production of surface components in S. Typhimurium and E. coli. Its
mode of action is mainly explained by its antagonism with the H-NS repressor for 
the same DNA binding regions. Interestingly, it has been reported that the
alarmone ppGpp promotes SlyA dimerization and DNA binding at the promoter of
pagC, enhancing the expression of this gene in Salmonella. A recurring problem in
the field of stringent response has been to find a way of following ppGpp levels 
in vivo in real time. We thought that SlyA, as a ppGpp responsive ligand, was a
perfect candidate for the development of a specific ppGpp biosensor. Therefore,
we decided to characterize in depth this SlyA control by ppGpp. However, using
various genes whose expression is activated by SlyA, as reporters, we showed that
ppGpp does not affect SlyA regulation in vivo. In addition, modulating ppGpp
levels did not affect SlyA dimerization in vivo, and did not impact its binding
to DNA in vitro. We finally showed that ppGpp is required for the expression of
hlyE in E. coli, a gene also activated by SlyA, and propose that both regulators 
are independently required for hlyE expression. The initial report of ppGpp
action on SlyA might be explained by a similar action of SlyA and ppGpp on pagC
expression, and the complexity of promoters controlled by several global
regulators, such as the promoters of pagC in Salmonella or hlyE in E. coli.

Copyright © 2020 Bartoli, Viala and Bouveret.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01856 
PMCID: PMC7417354
PMID: 32849447 


3. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2020 Jun;55:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2020.01.002. Epub 2020
Feb 7.

The evolution of MarR family transcription factors as counter-silencers in
regulatory networks.

Will WR(1), Fang FC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. Electronic address:
fcfang@u.washington.edu.

Gene duplication facilitates the evolution of biological complexity, as one copy 
of a gene retains its original function while a duplicate copy can acquire
mutations that would otherwise diminish fitness. Duplication has played a
particularly important role in the evolution of regulatory networks by permitting
novel regulatory interactions and responses to stimuli. The diverse MarR family
of transcription factors (MFTFs) illustrate this concept, ranging from highly
specific repressors of single operons to pleiotropic global regulators
controlling hundreds of genes. MFTFs are often genetically and functionally
linked to antimicrobial efflux systems. However, the SlyA MFTF lineage in the
Enterobacteriaceae plays little or no role in regulating efflux but rather
functions as transcriptional counter-silencers, which alleviate xenogeneic
silencing of horizontally acquired genes and facilitate bacterial evolution by
horizontal gene transfer. This review will explore recent advances in our
understanding of MFTF traits that have contributed to their functional evolution.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2020.01.002 
PMCID: PMC7311280
PMID: 32044654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. mBio. 2019 Apr 16;10(2). pii: e02772-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02772-18.

A Dopamine-Responsive Signal Transduction Controls Transcription of Salmonella
enterica Serovar Typhimurium Virulence Genes.

Yang D(1), Kong Y(1), Sun W(2), Kong W(3), Shi Y(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology & Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany, 
New York, USA.
(3)Center for Immunotherapy, Vaccines, and Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA wei.kong@asu.edu yixin.shi@asu.edu.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA
wei.kong@asu.edu yixin.shi@asu.edu.
(5)Center for Immunotherapy, Vaccines, and Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

We have shown that the ligand-responsive MarR family member SlyA plays an
important role in transcription activation of multiple virulence genes in
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium by responding to guanosine tetraphosphate
(ppGpp). Here, we demonstrate that another MarR family member, EmrR, is required 
for virulence of S. Typhimurium and another enteric bacterium, Yersinia pestis
EmrR is found to activate transcription of an array of virulence determinants,
including Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2) genes and several divergent
operons, which have been shown to be activated by SlyA and the PhoP/PhoQ
two-component system. We studied the regulatory effect of EmrR on one of these
genetic loci, i.e., the pagC-pagD divergent operon, and characterized a
catecholamine neurotransmitter, dopamine, as an EmrR-sensed signal. Dopamine acts
on EmrR to reduce its ability to bind to the target promoters, thus functioning
as a negative signal to downregulate this EmrR-activated transcription. EmrR can 
bind to AT-rich sequences, which particularly overlap the SlyA and PhoP binding
sites in the pagC-pagD divergent promoter. EmrR is a priming transcription
regulator that binds its target promoters prior to successive transcription
activators, by which it displaces universal silencer H-NS from these promoters
and facilitates successive regulators to bind these regions. Regulation of the
Salmonella-specific gene in Escherichia coli and Y. pestis reveals that
EmrR-dependent regulation is conserved in enteric bacteria. These observations
suggest that EmrR is a transcription activator to control the expression of
virulence genes, including the SPI-2 genes. Dopamine can act on the EmrR-mediated
signal transduction, thus downregulating expression of these virulence
factors.IMPORTANCE In this study, MarR family regulator EmrR is identified as a
novel virulence factor of enteric bacteria, here exemplified by Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium and Yersinia pestis EmrR exerts an essential effect 
as a transcription activator for expression of virulence determinants, including 
Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 genes and a set of horizontally acquired
genetic loci that formed divergent operons. EmrR senses the neurotransmitter
dopamine and is subsequently released from target promoters, resulting in
downregulation of the virulence gene expression. Through this action on EmrR,
dopamine can weaken Salmonella resistance against host defense mechanisms. This
provides an explanation for the previous observation that dopamine inhibits
bacterial infection in animal gastrointestinal tracts. Our findings provide
evidence that this neurotransmitter can modulate bacterial gene expression
through interaction with virulence regulator EmrR.

Copyright © 2019 Yang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02772-18 
PMCID: PMC6469979
PMID: 30992361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. mSystems. 2018 Sep 11;3(5). pii: e00057-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18.
eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Coordinated Hibernation of Transcriptional and Translational Apparatus during
Growth Transition of Escherichia coli to Stationary Phase.

Yoshida H(1), Shimada T(2), Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the process of Escherichia coli K-12 growth from exponential phase to
stationary, marked alteration takes place in the pattern of overall genome
expression through modulation of both parts of the transcriptional and
translational apparatus. In transcription, the sigma subunit with promoter
recognition properties is replaced from the growth-related factor RpoD by the
stationary-phase-specific factor RpoS. The unused RpoD is stored by binding with 
the anti-sigma factor Rsd. In translation, the functional 70S ribosome is
converted to inactive 100S dimers through binding with the ribosome modulation
factor (RMF). Up to the present time, the regulatory mechanisms of expression of 
these two critical proteins, Rsd and RMF, have remained totally unsolved. In this
study, attempts were made to identify the whole set of transcription factors
involved in transcription regulation of the rsd and rmf genes using the newly
developed promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) screening system. In the
first screening, 74 candidate TFs with binding activity to both of the rsd and
rmf promoters were selected from a total of 194 purified TFs. After 6 cycles of
screening, we selected 5 stress response TFs, ArcA, McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA,
for detailed analysis in vitro and in vivo of their regulatory roles. Results
indicated that both rsd and rmf promoters are repressed by ArcA and activated by 
McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA. We propose the involvement of a number of TFs in
simultaneous and coordinated regulation of the transcriptional and translational 
apparatus. By using genomic SELEX (gSELEX) screening, each of the five TFs was
found to regulate not only the rsd and rmf genes but also a variety of genes for 
growth and survival. IMPORTANCE During the growth transition of E. coli from
exponential phase to stationary, the genome expression pattern is altered
markedly. For this alteration, the transcription apparatus is altered by binding 
of anti-sigma factor Rsd to the RpoD sigma factor for sigma factor replacement,
while the translation machinery is modulated by binding of RMF to 70S ribosome to
form inactive ribosome dimer. Using the PS-TF screening system, a number of TFs
were found to bind to both the rsd and rmf promoters, of which the regulatory
roles of 5 representative TFs (one repressor ArcA and the four activators McbR,
RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA) were analyzed in detail. The results altogether indicated
the involvement of a common set of TFs, each sensing a specific environmental
condition, in coordinated hibernation of the transcriptional and translational
apparatus for adaptation and survival under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18 
PMCID: PMC6134199
PMID: 30225374 


6. Microbiology (Reading). 2017 Mar;163(3):400-409. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000423. Epub 
2017 Mar 29.

Identification of new members of the Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 SlyA regulon.

Curran TD(1), Abacha F(2), Hibberd SP(1), Rolfe MD(1), Lacey MM(2), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(2)Biomolecular Research Centre, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, S1 1WB, 
UK.

SlyA is a member of the MarR family of bacterial transcriptional regulators.
Previously, SlyA has been shown to directly regulate only two operons in
Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655, fimB and hlyE (clyA). In both cases, SlyA activates
gene expression by antagonizing repression by the nucleoid-associated protein
H-NS. Here, the transcript profiles of aerobic glucose-limited steady-state
chemostat cultures of E. coli K-12 MG1655, slyA mutant and slyA over-expression
strains are reported. The transcript profile of the slyA mutant was not
significantly different from that of the parent; however, that of the slyA
expression strain was significantly different from that of the vector control.
Transcripts representing 27 operons were increased in abundance, whereas 3 were
decreased. Of the 30 differentially regulated operons, 24 have previously been
associated with sites of H-NS binding, suggesting that antagonism of H-NS
repression is a common feature of SlyA-mediated transcription regulation. Direct 
binding of SlyA to DNA located upstream of a selection of these targets permitted
the identification of new operons likely to be directly regulated by SlyA.
Transcripts of four operons coding for cryptic adhesins exhibited enhanced
expression, and this was consistent with enhanced biofilm formation associated
with the SlyA over-producing strain.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000423 
PMCID: PMC5797941
PMID: 28073397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Protein J. 2016 Aug;35(4):269-82. doi: 10.1007/s10930-016-9670-1.

Expression, Functional Characterization and X-ray Analysis of HosA, A Member of
MarR Family of Transcription Regulator from Uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Roy A(1)(2), Reddi R(3), Sawhney B(1)(2), Ghosh DK(1)(2), Addlagatta A(3), Ranjan
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Functional Genomics Group, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana, 500001, India.
(2)Graduate Studies, Manipal University, Manipal, 576104, India.
(3)Centre for Chemical Biology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
Hyderabad, Telangana, 500007, India.
(4)Computational and Functional Genomics Group, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana, 500001, India. akash@cdfd.org.in.

Regulators belonging to multiple antibiotic resistance regulator (MarR) family
are widespread in prokaryotes and are involved in regulation of genes that are
responsible for virulence and pathogenicity in most of the clinically important
pathogens. Here we report the transcriptional, biophysical, and X-ray analyses of
homologue of SlyA (HosA), a member of MarR family that is predominantly present
in the pathogenic strains of Enterobacteriaceae family. The initiation of hosA
transcription was observed to occur at two independent start sites and subsequent
binding study has revealed that the purified HosA interacts with its upstream
region suggesting a probable autoregulation. The secondary structure analysis
through circular dichroism spectroscopy demonstrated that HosA is predominantly
composed of the alpha helix with higher thermal stability. To further understand 
the three-dimensional structure, HosA was crystallized and the crystals were
diffracted to maximum of 2.9 Ǻ on exposure to X-rays. Analysis of the X-ray
crystallographic data suggested a primitive space group (P 6 ? 2 2), with unit
cell parameters a = b = 64.19 Å and c = 244.25 Å. The solvent content and
Matthews coefficient were 41 % and 2.11 Å(3) Da(-1), respectively, which
indicated the existence of two molecules of HosA in the asymmetric unit of
crystal.

DOI: 10.1007/s10930-016-9670-1 
PMID: 27325406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Infect Immun. 2016 Mar 24;84(4):1073-1082. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00806-15. Print 2016 
Apr.

Characterization of SlyA in Shigella flexneri Identifies a Novel Role in
Virulence.

Weatherspoon-Griffin N(1), Wing HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada,
USA.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada,
USA helen.wing@unlv.edu.

The SlyA transcriptional regulator has important roles in the virulence and
pathogenesis of several members of the Enterobacteriaceae family, including
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and Escherichia coli. Despite the
identification of the slyA gene in Shigella flexneri nearly 2 decades ago, as
well as the significant conservation of SlyA among enteric bacteria, the role of 
SlyA in Shigella remains unknown. The genes regulated by SlyA in closely related 
organisms often are absent from or mutated inS. flexneri, and consequently many
described SlyA-dependent phenotypes are not present. By characterizing the
expression of slyA and determining its ultimate effect in this highly virulent
organism, we postulated that novel SlyA-regulated virulence phenotypes would be
identified. In this study, we report the first analysis of SlyA in Shigella and
show that (i) the slyA gene is transcribed and ultimately translated into
protein, (ii) slyA promoter activity is maximal during stationary phase and is
negatively autoregulated and positively regulated by the PhoP response regulator,
(iii) the exogenous expression of slyA rescues transcription and
virulence-associated deficiencies during virulence-repressed conditions, and (iv)
the absence of slyA significantly decreases acid resistance, demonstrating a
novel and important role in Shigella virulence. Cumulatively, our study
illustrates unexpected parallels between the less conserved S. flexneri and S
Typhimurium slyA promoters as well as a unique role for SlyA in Shigella
virulence that has not been described previously in any closely related organism.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00806-15 
PMCID: PMC4807491
PMID: 26831468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochemistry. 2016 Feb 23;55(7):1120-34. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01163. Epub
2016 Feb 11.

HosA, a MarR Family Transcriptional Regulator, Represses Nonoxidative
Hydroxyarylic Acid Decarboxylase Operon and Is Modulated by 4-Hydroxybenzoic
Acid.

Roy A(1)(2), Ranjan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Functional Genomics Group, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana 500001, India.
(2)Graduate studies, Manipal University , Manipal 576104, India.

Members of the Multiple antibiotic resistance Regulator (MarR) family of DNA
binding proteins regulate transcription of a wide array of genes required for
virulence and pathogenicity of bacteria. The present study reports the molecular 
characterization of HosA (Homologue of SlyA), a MarR protein, with respect to its
target gene, DNA recognition motif, and nature of its ligand. Through a
comparative genomics approach, we demonstrate that hosA is in synteny with
nonoxidative hydroxyarylic acid decarboxylase (HAD) operon and is present
exclusively within the mutS-rpoS polymorphic region in nine different genera of
Enterobacteriaceae family. Using molecular biology and biochemical approach, we
demonstrate that HosA binds to a palindromic sequence downstream to the
transcription start site of divergently transcribed nonoxidative HAD operon and
represses its expression. Furthermore, in silico analysis showed that the
recognition motif for HosA is highly conserved in the upstream region of
divergently transcribed operon in different genera of Enterobacteriaceae family. 
A systematic chemical search for the physiological ligand revealed that
4-hydroxybenzoic acid (4-HBA) interacts with HosA and derepresses HosA mediated
repression of the nonoxidative HAD operon. Based on our study, we propose a model
for molecular mechanism underlying the regulation of nonoxidative HAD operon by
HosA in Enterobacteriaceae family.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01163 
PMID: 26818787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. mBio. 2014 Aug 19;5(4). pii: e01116-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01116-14.

Biofilms formed by gram-negative bacteria undergo increased lipid a
palmitoylation, enhancing in vivo survival.

Chalabaev S(1), Chauhan A(1), Novikov A(2), Iyer P(1), Szczesny M(1), Beloin
C(1), Caroff M(2), Ghigo JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique des Biofilms, Paris, France.
(2)Equipe Endotoxines, Université de Paris-Sud, CNRS UMR 8621, IGM, Orsay,
France.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique des Biofilms, Paris, France
jmghigo@pasteur.fr.

Bacterial biofilm communities are associated with profound physiological changes 
that lead to novel properties compared to the properties of individual
(planktonic) bacteria. The study of biofilm-associated phenotypes is an essential
step toward control of deleterious effects of pathogenic biofilms. Here we
investigated lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structural modifications in Escherichia
coli biofilm bacteria, and we showed that all tested commensal and
pathogenic E. coli biofilm bacteria display LPS modifications corresponding to an
increased level of incorporation of palmitate acyl chain (palmitoylation) into
lipid A compared to planktonic bacteria. Genetic analysis showed that lipid A
palmitoylation in biofilms is mediated by the PagP enzyme, which is regulated by 
the histone-like protein repressor H-NS and the SlyA regulator. While lipid A
palmitoylation does not influence bacterial adhesion, it weakens inflammatory
response and enhances resistance to some antimicrobial peptides. Moreover, we
showed that lipid A palmitoylation increases in vivo survival of biofilm bacteria
in a clinically relevant model of catheter infection, potentially contributing to
biofilm tolerance to host immune defenses. The widespread occurrence of increased
lipid A palmitoylation in biofilms formed by all tested bacteria suggests that it
constitutes a new biofilm-associated phenotype in Gram-negative
bacteria.IMPORTANCE: Bacterial communities called biofilms display characteristic
properties compared to isolated (planktonic) bacteria, suggesting that some
molecules could be more particularly produced under biofilm conditions. We
investigated biofilm-associated modifications occurring in the lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), a major component of all Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane. We showed
that all tested commensal and pathogenic biofilm bacteria display high
incorporation of a palmitate acyl chain into the lipid A part of LPS. This lipid 
A palmitoylation is mediated by the PagP enzyme, whose expression in biofilm is
controlled by the regulatory proteins H-NS and SlyA. We also showed that lipid A 
palmitoylation in biofilm bacteria reduces host inflammatory response and
enhances their survival in an animal model of biofilm infections. While these
results provide new insights into the biofilm lifestyle, they also suggest that
the level of lipid A palmitoylation could be used as an indicator to monitor the 
development of biofilm infections on medical surfaces.

Copyright © 2014 Chalabaev et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01116-14 
PMCID: PMC4147861
PMID: 25139899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((soxS) AND (glpX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Feb;69(2):390-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkt352. Epub 2013 
Sep 15.

Regulation of acrAB expression by cellular metabolites in Escherichia coli.

Ruiz C(1), Levy SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance and the Department of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Multidrug efflux pumps mediate resistance to antibiotics and other
toxic compounds. We studied the role of AcrAB-TolC, the main efflux pump in
Escherichia coli, in regulating gene expression.
METHODS: Deletion mutants, an acrABp-lacZ fusion and reverse
transcription-real-time quantitative PCR experiments were used to study the role 
of AcrAB-TolC and metabolism in regulating gene expression of the acrAB operon
and its transcriptional regulators.
RESULTS: Deletion of the acrB gene increased the expression of the acrAB operon. 
A similar induction of acrAB was found when acrA or tolC was deleted, and when
the pump function was inhibited using phenylalanine-arginine-β-naphthylamide. The
induction of acrAB in the ΔacrB strain was totally (AcrR or SoxS) or partially
(SoxR or MarA) prevented when the genes for these acrAB regulators were also
deleted. The expression of soxS and marA, but not of acrR, was increased in the
ΔacrB strain, which also showed altered expression of many other genes related to
different cellular processes, including motility. Deletion of the metabolic genes
entA and entE (enterobactin biosysnthesis), glpX (gluconeogenesis), cysH
(cysteine biosynthesis) and purA (purine biosynthesis) also prevented activation 
of the acrAB promoter in the ΔacrB strain. Addition of the enterobactin
biosynthesis intermediate metabolite 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate induced the expression
of acrAB.
CONCLUSIONS: These results together suggest a model in which the AcrAB-TolC pump 
effluxes cellular metabolites that are toxic and/or have a signalling role. If
the pump is inactivated or inhibited, these metabolites would accumulate,
inactivating AcrR and/or up-regulating soxS and marA expression, ultimately
triggering the up-regulation of acrAB expression to restore homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkt352 
PMCID: PMC3886929
PMID: 24043404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((soxS) AND (ompW)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Jan;138:103808. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103808. Epub 2019
Oct 18.

OmpW is positively regulated by iron via Fur, and negatively regulated by SoxS
contribution to oxidative stress resistance in Escherichia coli.

Zhang P(1), Ye Z(1), Ye C(1), Zou H(1), Gao Z(1), Pan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine,
School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou,
310018, China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine,
School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou,
310018, China. Electronic address: jianyi.pan@zstu.edu.cn.

Iron plays a central role at the interface of pathogen and host. The ability to
sequester iron from a host not only reduces host immune defenses but also
promotes pathogen virulence, leading to the occurrence of infectious disease.
Recently, outer membrane protein OmpW was shown to protect bacteria against harsh
environmental conditions and to play a role in infectious disease. The expression
of this versatile protein is controlled by iron, but the underlying mechanism of 
iron regulation has not been elucidated. In this study, the relation between OmpW
expression and iron was investigated. Our results demonstrated that expression of
OmpW is responsive to iron. Iron uptake analysis showed that an ompW mutant
strain has a strong requirement for iron as compared to wild type and the ompW
complemented strain. Moreover, ferric uptake regulation protein Fur, an iron
binding transcriptional factor, was downregulated under iron limitation
conditions and had a similar expression profile to OmpW in the presence or
absence of iron. Based on these results, we suggest that iron regulates OmpW by
binding to Fur. Furthermore, SoxS, a transcriptional factor involved in oxidative
stress, was found to negatively regulate OmpW. We found that downregulating or
knocking out OmpW results in bacterial resistance to oxidative stress. These
findings provide new insight into the regulation of OmpW expression by iron, and 
may represent a new mechanism contributing to iron-mediated infectious disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103808 
PMID: 31634530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors declare
no conflict of interest.


2. Front Microbiol. 2016 Apr 27;7:604. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604. eCollection
2016.

Regulation of the Two-Component Regulator CpxR on Aminoglycosides and β-lactams
Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Huang H(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan L(1), Pan Y(1), Gao Y(3), Ma C(1), Hu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University Zhengzhou,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural UniversityZhengzhou, China;
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Institute of Science and
TechnologyXinxiang, China.
(3)Animal Husbandry Bureau of Henan Province Zhengzhou, China.

The two-component signal transduction system CpxAR is especially widespread in
Gram-negative bacteria. It has been reported that CpxAR contributes to the
multidrug resistance (MDR) in Escherichia coli. CpxR is a response regulator in
the two-component CpxAR system. The aim of this study was to explore the role of 
cpxR in the MDR of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. The minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics commonly used in veterinary medicine
for strains JS (a multidrug-susceptible standard strain of S. enterica serovar
Typhimurium), JSΔcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR (*), JSΔcpxRΔacrB,
JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR, JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR (*), 9 S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
isolates (SH1-9), and SH1-9ΔcpxR were determined by the 2-fold broth
microdilution method. The relative mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW,
ompD, tolC, acrB, acrD, acrF, mdtA, marA, and soxS in strains JS, JSΔcpxR, and
JSΔcpxR/pcpxR were detected by real-time PCR. The results showed 2- to 4-fold
decreases in the MICs of amikacin (AMK), gentamycin (GEN), apramycin (APR),
neomycin (NEO), ceftriaxone (CRO), ceftiofur (CEF), and cefquinome (CEQ) for
strain JSΔcpxR, as compared to those for the parental strain JS. Likewise,
SH1-9ΔcpxR were found to have 2- to 8-fold reduction in resistance to the above
antibiotics, except for NEO, as compared to their parental strains SH1-9.
Furthermore, 2- to 4-fold further decreases in the MICs of AMK, GEN, APR, and CEF
for strain JSΔcpxRΔacrB were observed, as compared to those for strain JSΔacrB.
In addition, CpxR overproduction in strain JSΔcpxR led to significant decreases
in the mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW, ompD, tolC, acrB, marA, and
soxS, and significant increases in those of stm3031 and stm1530. Notably, after
all strains were induced simultaneously by GEN to the 15th passage at
subinhibitory concentrations, strain JSΔcpxR/pcpxR showed significant increases
in mRNA expression levels of the efflux pump acrD and mdtA genes, as compared to 
strain JSΔcpxR. Our results indicate that the two-component regulator CpxR
contributes to resistance of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium to aminoglycosides
and β-lactams by influencing the expression level of the MDR-related genes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604 
PMCID: PMC4846824
PMID: 27199934 


############# ((uhpA) AND (uhpA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Oct 20;11:575031. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.575031.
eCollection 2020.

Novel Chromosomal Mutations Responsible for Fosfomycin Resistance in Escherichia 
coli.

Cattoir V(1)(2)(3), Pourbaix A(4), Magnan M(4), Chau F(4), de Lastours V(4)(5),
Felden B(3), Fantin B(4)(5), Guérin F(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)CHU de Rennes, Service de Bactériologie-Hygiène Hospitalière, Rennes, France.
(2)Centre National de Référence sur la Résistance aux Antibiotiques (laboratoire 
associé 'Entérocoques'), Rennes, France.
(3)Inserm, Bacterial Regulatory RNAs and Medicine - UMR_S 1230, Rennes, France.
(4)IAME, UMR-1137, Inserm and Université de Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(5)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Beaujon, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)CHU de Caen, Service de Microbiologie, Caen, France.
(7)Université de Caen Normandie, EA4655, Caen, France.

Fosfomycin resistance in Escherichia coli results from chromosomal mutations or
acquisition of plasmid-mediated genes. Because these mechanisms may be absent in 
some resistant isolates, we aimed at decipher the genetic basis of fosfomycin
resistance in E. coli. Different groups of isolates were studied:
fosfomycin-resistant mutants selected in vitro from E. coli CFT073 (MIC = 1 mg/L)
and two groups (wildtype and non-wildtype) of E. coli clinical isolates.
Single-nucleotide allelic replacement was performed to confirm the implication of
novel mutations into resistance. Induction of uhpT expression by
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) was assessed by RT-qPCR. The genome of all clinical
isolates was sequenced by MiSeq (Illumina). Two first-step mutants were obtained 
in vitro from CFT073 (MICs, 128 mg/L) with single mutations: G469R in uhpB (M3); 
F384L in uhpC (M4). Second-step mutants (MICs, 256 mg/L) presented additional
mutations: R282V in galU (M7 from M3); Q558∗ in lon (M8 from M4). Introduction of
uhpB or uhpC mutations by site-directed mutagenesis conferred a 128-fold increase
in fosfomycin MICs, whereas single mutations in galU or lon were only responsible
for a 2-fold increase. Also, these mutations abolished the induction of uhpT
expression by G6P. All 14 fosfomycin-susceptible clinical isolates (MICs, 0.5-8
mg/L) were devoid of any mutation. At least one genetic change was detected in
all but one fosfomycin-resistant clinical isolates (MICs, 32 - >256 mg/L)
including 8, 17, 18, 5, and 8 in uhpA, uhpB, uhpC, uhpT, and glpT genes,
respectively. In conclusion, novel mutations in uhpB and uhpC are associated with
fosfomycin resistance in E. coli clinical isolates.

Copyright © 2020 Cattoir, Pourbaix, Magnan, Chau, de Lastours, Felden, Fantin and
Guérin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.575031 
PMCID: PMC7607045
PMID: 33193186 


2. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Aug 24;9(9). pii: E534. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9090534.

Characterization of Fosfomycin and Nitrofurantoin Resistance Mechanisms in
Escherichia coli Isolated in Clinical Urine Samples.

Sorlozano-Puerto A(1), Lopez-Machado I(1), Albertuz-Crespo M(1),
Martinez-Gonzalez LJ(2), Gutierrez-Fernandez J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine and PhD Program in Clinical
Medicine and Public Health, University of Granada-ibs, 18016 Granada, Spain.
(2)Pfizer-University of Granada-Junta de Andalucía Centre for Genomics and
Oncological Research (GENYO), 18016 Granada, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Virgen de las Nieves University Hospital-ibs,
18014 Granada, Spain.

Fosfomycin and nitrofurantoin are antibiotics of choice to orally treat
non-complicated urinary tract infections (UTIs) of community origin because they 
remain active against bacteria resistant to other antibiotics. However,
epidemiologic surveillance studies have detected a reduced susceptibility to
these drugs. The objective of this study was to determine possible mechanisms of 
resistance to these antibiotics in clinical isolates of fosfomycin- and/or
nitrofurantoin-resistant UTI-producing Escherichia coli. We amplified and
sequenced murA, glpT, uhpT, uhpA, ptsI, cyaA, nfsA, nfsB, and ribE genes, and
screened plasmid-borne fosfomycin-resistance genes fosA3, fosA4, fosA5, fosA6,
and fosC2 and nitrofurantoin-resistance genes oqxA and oqxB by polymerase chain
reaction. Among 29 isolates studied, 22 were resistant to fosfomycin due to
deletion of uhpT and/or uhpA genes, and 2 also possessed the fosA3 gene. Some
modifications detected in sequences of NfsA (His11Tyr, Ser33Arg, Gln67Leu,
Cys80Arg, Gly126Arg, Gly154Glu, Arg203Cys), NfsB (Gln44His, Phe84Ser, Arg107Cys, 
Gly192Ser, Arg207His), and RibE (Pro55His), and the production of truncated NfsA 
(Gln67 and Gln147) and NfsB (Glu54), were associated with nitrofurantoin
resistance in 15/29 isolates; however, the presence of oqxAB plasmid genes was
not detected in any isolate. Resistance to fosfomycin was associated with the
absence of transporter UhpT expression and/or the presence of
antibiotic-modifying enzymes encoded by fosA3 plasmid-mediated gene. Resistance
to nitrofurantoin was associated with modifications of NfsA, NfsB, and RibE
proteins. The emergence and spread of these resistance mechanisms, including
transferable resistance, could compromise the future usefulness of fosfomycin and
nitrofurantoin against UTIs. Furthermore, knowledge of the genetic mechanisms
underlying resistance may lead to rapid DNA-based testing for resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9090534 
PMCID: PMC7558542
PMID: 32847131 


3. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Sep;22:238-243. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.12.019.
Epub 2020 Feb 13.

Mechanisms of fosfomycin resistance in clinical isolates of carbapenem-resistant 
Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Liu P(1), Chen S(2), Wu ZY(2), Qi M(2), Li XY(3), Liu CX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 109 Xueyuan W Road, Wenzhou
325000, Zhejiang Province, China; Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi Province, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 109 Xueyuan W Road, Wenzhou
325000, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 109 Xueyuan W Road, Wenzhou
325000, Zhejiang Province, China. Electronic address: lxy@wzhealth.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, 109 Xueyuan W Road, Wenzhou
325000, Zhejiang Province, China. Electronic address: wzcaixia1978@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: Older antimicrobials such as fosfomycin are being considered as
alternative agents in the treatment of drug-resistant organisms. However, there
are limited data on the usefulness of fosfomycin against carbapenem-resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP). This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of
fosfomycin resistance and associated mechanisms in CRKP.
METHODS: A total of 99 clinical CRKP isolates were collected in the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University (Wenzhou, China) between
January 2017 and June 2018. Fosfomycin susceptibility testing was performed by
the agar dilution method. Carbapenemase and fosfomycin resistance genes were
detected by PCR. Analysis of the murA, glpT, uhpT, uhpA, ptsI and cyaA genes was 
performed by PCR and sequencing of four fosfomycin-resistant fosA3-negative CRKP 
strains. Conjugation experiments were employed to determine the mobility of the
fosA3 gene.
RESULTS: Of the 99 CRKP isolates, fosfomycin-non-susceptibility was detected in
48 (48.5%) isolates, among which the fosA3 gene was detected in 44. Among the
four fosfomycin-resistant fosA3-negative CRKP isolates, one isolate possessed a
single nucleotide insertion and deletion mutations as well as 219 nucleotide
substitution mutations in murA, two isolates possessed deletion or mutation of
large DNA fragments in glpT, and one isolate possessed a fragment insertion
sequence in glpT. Transfection into Escherichia coli J53 via plasmid conjugation 
was successful for 19 (43.2%) of the 44 fosA3-positive CRKP isolates.
CONCLUSION: The fosA3 gene is the primary mechanism of fosfomycin resistance in
CRKP and can be transmitted widely by plasmid in hospitals. Mutations in murA and
glpT were found in fosfomycin-resistant fosA3-negative CRKP.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.12.019 
PMID: 32061879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Future Microbiol. 2018 Dec;13:1693-1696. doi: 10.2217/fmb-2018-0294. Epub 2018
Dec 11.

How is fosfomycin resistance developed in Escherichia coli?

Cattoir V(1)(2)(3), Guérin F(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes 1, Inserm U1230, Rennes, France.
(2)CHU de Rennes, Service de Bactériologie-Hygiène Hospitalière, Rennes, France.
(3)CNR de la Résistance aux Antibiotiques, Rennes, France.
(4)CHU de Caen, Service de Microbiologie, Caen, France.
(5)Université de Caen Normandie, EA4655, Caen, France.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb-2018-0294 
PMID: 30526061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Clin Microbiol. 2017 Dec 26;56(1). pii: e01368-17. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01368-17.
Print 2018 Jan.

Frequency and Mechanisms of Spontaneous Fosfomycin Nonsusceptibility Observed
upon Disk Diffusion Testing of Escherichia coli.

Lucas AE(#)(1), Ito R(#)(1)(2), Mustapha MM(1), McElheny CL(1), Mettus RT(1),
Bowler SL(1), Kantz SF(1), Pacey MP(1), Pasculle AW(3), Cooper VS(4)(5), Doi
Y(6)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Center for Innovative Antimicrobial Therapy, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA yod4@pitt.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Fosfomycin maintains activity against most Escherichia coli clinical isolates,
but the growth of E. coli colonies within the zone of inhibition around the
fosfomycin disk is occasionally observed upon susceptibility testing. We aimed to
estimate the frequency of such nonsusceptible inner colony mutants and identify
the underlying resistance mechanisms. Disk diffusion testing of fosfomycin was
performed on 649 multidrug-resistant E. coli clinical isolates collected between 
2011 and 2015. For those producing inner colonies inside the susceptible range,
the parental strains and their representative inner colony mutants were subjected
to MIC testing, whole-genome sequencing, reverse transcription-quantitative PCR
(qRT-PCR), and carbohydrate utilization studies. Of the 649 E. coli clinical
isolates, 5 (0.8%) consistently produced nonsusceptible inner colonies.
Whole-genome sequencing revealed the deletion of uhpT encoding hexose-6-phosphate
antiporter in 4 of the E. coli inner colony mutants, while the remaining mutant
contained a nonsense mutation in uhpA The expression of uhpT was absent in the
mutant strains with uhpT deletion and was not inducible in the strain with the
uhpA mutation, unlike in its parental strain. All 5 inner colony mutants had
reduced growth on minimal medium supplemented with glucose-6-phosphate. In
conclusion, fosfomycin-nonsusceptible inner colony mutants can occur due to the
loss of function or induction of UhpT but are rare among multidrug-resistant E.
coli clinical strains. Considering that these mutants carry high biological
costs, we suggest that fosfomycin susceptibility of strains that generate inner
colony mutants can be interpreted on the basis of the zone of inhibition without 
accounting for the inner colonies.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01368-17 
PMCID: PMC5744208
PMID: 29093108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Front Microbiol. 2017 Mar 16;8:426. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00426. eCollection
2017.

Cooperative Actions of CRP-cAMP and FNR Increase the Fosfomycin Susceptibility of
Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) by Elevating the Expression of glpT
and uhpT under Anaerobic Conditions.

Kurabayashi K(1), Tanimoto K(2), Tomita H(3), Hirakawa H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit, Graduate School of
Medicine, Gunma University Gunma, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Bacterial Drug Resistance, Gunma University, Graduate School of 
Medicine Gunma, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Bacterial Drug Resistance, Gunma University, Graduate School of 
MedicineGunma, Japan; Department of Bacteriology, Gunma University, Graduate
School of MedicineGunma, Japan.

Bacterial infections to anaerobic site are often hard to be treated because the
activity of most of antimicrobials decreases under anaerobic conditions. However,
fosfomycin rather provides a greater activity under anaerobic conditions than
aerobic conditions. Previously, we found that expression of glpT and uhpT,
fosfomycin symporters in enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) was
upregulated by FNR, a global regulator during the anaerobiosis of the bacterium, 
which led to increased uptake and susceptibility to this drug. In this study, we 
showed that expression of glpT and uhpT is induced by CRP-cAMP, the regulator
complex under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. The activity of CRP-cAMP in 
EHEC was elevated under anaerobic conditions because levels of both CRP and cAMP 
were higher in the cells when grown anaerobically than those when grown
aerobically. Results of expression study using mutants indicated that CRP-cAMP is
indispensable for expression of glpT but not uhpT-whereas that of uhpT requires
UhpA that is the response regulator composing of two-component system with the
sensor kinase, UhpB. The CRP-cAMP protein bound to a region that overlaps RNA
polymerase binding site for glpT and region upstream of UhpA binding site for
uhpT. FNR bound to a region further upstream of CRP-cAMP binding site on region
upstream of the glpT gene. These combined results suggested that increased
antibacterial activity of fosfomycin to EHEC under anaerobic conditions is due to
activation of FNR and increment of CRP-cAMP activity. Then, FNR enhances the
expression of glpT activated by CRP-cAMP while CRP-cAMP and FNR cooperatively
aids the action of UhpA to express uhpT to maximum level.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00426 
PMCID: PMC5352689
PMID: 28360903 


7. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:5470241. doi: 10.1155/2017/5470241. Epub 2017 Jan 19.

Mechanism of Reduced Susceptibility to Fosfomycin in Escherichia coli Clinical
Isolates.

Ohkoshi Y(1), Sato T(2), Suzuki Y(2), Yamamoto S(2), Shiraishi T(2), Ogasawara
N(2), Yokota SI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan; Department of Clinical Laboratory, NTT East
Sapporo Hospital, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-0061, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

In recent years, multidrug resistance of Escherichia coli has become a serious
problem. However, resistance to fosfomycin (FOM) has been low. We screened E.
coli clinical isolates with reduced susceptibility to FOM and characterized
molecular mechanisms of resistance and reduced susceptibility of these strains.
Ten strains showing reduced FOM susceptibility (MIC ≥ 8 μg/mL) in 211 clinical
isolates were found and examined. Acquisition of genes encoding FOM-modifying
enzyme genes (fos genes) and mutations in murA that underlie high resistance to
FOM were not observed. We examined ability of FOM incorporation via
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) transporter and sn-glycerol-3-phosphate transporter. In
ten strains, nine showed lack of growth on M9 minimum salt agar supplemented with
G6P. Eight of the ten strains showed fluctuated induction by G6P of uhpT that
encodes G6P transporter expression. Nucleotide sequences of the uhpT, uhpA, glpT,
ptsI, and cyaA shared several deletions and amino acid mutations in the nine
strains with lack of growth on G6P-supplemented M9 agar. In conclusion, reduction
of uhpT function is largely responsible for the reduced sensitivity to FOM in
clinical isolates that have not acquired FOM-modifying genes or mutations in
murA. However, there are a few strains whose mechanisms of reduced susceptibility
to FOM are still unclear.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/5470241 
PMCID: PMC5288514
PMID: 28197413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


8. Adv Microb Physiol. 2016;68:139-67. doi: 10.1016/bs.ampbs.2016.02.003. Epub 2016 
Mar 16.

Cooperation of Secondary Transporters and Sensor Kinases in Transmembrane
Signalling: The DctA/DcuS and DcuB/DcuS Sensor Complexes of Escherichia coli.

Unden G(1), Wörner S(2), Monzel C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology and Wine Research, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. Electronic address: unden@uni-mainz.de.
(2)Institute for Microbiology and Wine Research, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.

Many membrane-bound sensor kinases require accessory proteins for function. The
review describes functional control of membrane-bound sensors by transporters.
The C4-dicarboxylate sensor kinase DcuS requires the aerobic or anaerobic
C4-dicarboxylate transporters DctA or DcuB, respectively, for function and forms 
DctA/DcuS or DcuB/DcuS sensor complexes. Free DcuS is in the permanent (ligand
independent) ON state. The DctA/DcuS and DcuB/DcuS complexes, on the other hand, 
control expression in response to C4-dicarboxylates. In DctA/DcuS, helix 8b of
DctA and the PASC domain of DcuS are involved in interaction. The stimulus is
perceived by the extracytoplasmic sensor domain (PASP) of DcuS. The signal is
transmitted across the membrane by a piston-type movement of TM2 of DcuS which
appears to be pulled (by analogy to the homologous citrate sensor CitA) by
compaction of PASP after C4-dicarboxylate binding. In the cytoplasm, the signal
is perceived by the PASC domain of DcuS. PASC inhibits together with DctA the
kinase domain of DcuS which is released after C4-dicarboxylate binding. DcuS
exhibits two modes for regulating expression of target genes. At higher
C4-dicarboxylate levels, DcuS is part of the DctA/DcuS complex and in the
C4-dicarboxylate-responsive form which stimulates expression of target genes in
response to the concentration of the C4-dicarboxylates (catabolic use of
C4-dicarboxylates, mode I regulation). At limiting C4-dicarboxylate
concentrations (≤0.05mM), expression of DctA drops and free DcuS appears. Free
DcuS is in the permanent ON state (mode II regulation) and stimulates low level
(C4-dicarboxylate independent) DctA synthesis for DctA/DcuS complex formation and
anabolic C4-dicarboxylate uptake.

© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ampbs.2016.02.003 
PMID: 27134023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Plant Mol Biol. 2016 Feb;90(3):217-31. doi: 10.1007/s11103-015-0407-x. Epub 2015 
Dec 8.

Adaptation of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens VirG response regulator to activate
transcription in plants.

Czarnecka-Verner E(1), Salem TA(2)(3), Gurley WB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Program of Plant Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Florida, Bldg. 981, 1355 Museum Drive, P.O. Box
110700, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA. evaczar@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Program of Plant Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Florida, Bldg. 981, 1355 Museum Drive, P.O. Box
110700, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.
(3)Molecular Biology Department, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Institute,
University of Sadat City, Sadat City, Egypt.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Program of Plant Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Florida, Bldg. 981, 1355 Museum Drive, P.O. Box
110700, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA. wgurley@ufl.edu.

The Agrobacterium tumefaciens VirG response regulator of the VirA/VirG
two-component system was adapted to function in tobacco protoplasts. The
subcellular localization of VirG and VirA proteins transiently expressed in onion
cells was determined using GFP fusions. Preliminary studies using Gal4DBD-VP16
fusions with VirG and Escherichia coli UhpA, and NarL response regulators
indicated compatibility of these bacterial proteins with the eukaryotic
transcriptional apparatus. A strong transcriptional activator based on tandem
activation domains from the Drosophila fushi tarazu and Herpes simplex VP16 was
created. Selected configurations of the two-site Gal4-vir box GUS reporters were 
activated by chimeric effectors dependent on either the yeast Gal4 DNA-binding
domain or that of VirG. Transcriptional induction of the GUS reporter was highest
for the VirE19-element promoter with both constitutive and wild-type VirG-tandem 
activation domain effectors. Multiple VirE19 elements increased the reporter
activity proportionately, indicating that the VirG DNA binding domain was
functional in plants. The VirG constitutive-Q-VP16 effector was more active than 
the VirG wild-type. In both the constitutive and wild-type forms of VirG, Q-VP16 
activated transcription of the GUS reporter best when located at the C-terminus, 
i.e. juxtaposed to the VirG DNA binding domain. These results demonstrate the
possibility of using DNA binding domains from bacterial response regulators and
their cognate binding elements in the engineering of plant gene expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-015-0407-x 
PMID: 26646288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 17;10(8):e0135864. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135864.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of Fosfomycin Resistant Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamase-Producing 
Escherichia coli Isolates from Human and Pig in Taiwan.

Tseng SP(1), Wang SF(2), Kuo CY(3), Huang JW(2), Hung WC(4), Ke GM(5), Lu PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Health 
Sciences, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC; Department of
Marine Biotechnology and Resources, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Health 
Sciences, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Kaohsiung Medical University Chung-Ho
Memorial hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Internal Medicine,
Ministry of Health and Welfare Pingtung Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Graduate Institute of Animal Vaccine Technology, National Pingtung University 
of Science and Technology, Neipu, Pingtung, Taiwan, ROC.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC; College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Taiwan, Kaohsiung, ROC.

To investigate the efficacy of fosfomycin against extended-spectrum β-lactamases 
(ESBL) producing Escherichia coli in Taiwan and the resistance mechanisms and
characterization of human and pig isolates, we analyzed 145 ESBL-producing
isolates collected from two hospitals (n = 123) and five farms (n = 22) in Taiwan
from February to May, 2013. Antimicrobial susceptibilities were determined.
Clonal relatedness was determined by PFGE and multi-locus sequence typing. ESBLs,
ampC, and fosfomycin resistant genes were detected by PCR, and their flanking
regions were determined by PCR mapping and sequencing. The fosfomycin resistant
mechanisms, including modification of the antibiotic target (MurA), functionless 
transporters (GlpT and UhpT) and their regulating genes such as uhpA, cyaA, and
ptsI, and antibiotic inactivation by enzymes (FosA and FosC), were examined. The 
size and replicon type of plasmids carrying fosfomycin resistant genes were
analyzed. Our results revealed the susceptibility rates of fosfomycin were 94%
for human ESBL-producing E. coli isolates and 77% for pig isolates. The PFGE
analysis revealed 79 pulsotypes. No pulsotype was found existing in both human
and pig isolates. Three pulsotypes were distributed among isolates from two
hospitals. ISEcp1 carrying blaCTX-M-group 9 was the predominant transposable
elements of the ESBL genes. Among the thirteen fosfomycin resistant isolates,
functionless transporters were identified in 9 isolates. Three isolates contained
novel amino acid substitutions (Asn67Ile, Phe151Ser and Trp164Ser, Val146Ala and 
His159Tyr, respectively) in MurA (the target of fosfomycin). Four isolates had
fosfomycin modified enzyme (fosA3) in their plasmids. The fosA3 gene was
harboured in an IncN-type plasmid (101 kbp) in the three pig isolates and an
IncB/O-type plasmid (113 kbp) in the human isolate. In conclusion, we identified 
that 6% and 23% of the ESBL-producing E. coli from human and pigs were resistant 
to fosfomycin, respectively, in Taiwan. No clonal spread was found between human 
and pig isolates. Functionless transporters were the major cause of fosfomycin
resistance, and the fosA3-transferring plasmid between isolates warrants further 
monitoring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135864 
PMCID: PMC4539220
PMID: 26280832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((uvrY) AND (csrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 27;13(12):e0209554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554.
eCollection 2018.

Regulatory loop between the CsrA system and NhaR, a high salt/high pH regulator.

Król JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

In E. coli, under high pH/high salt conditions, a major Na+/H+ antiporter (NhaA) 
is activated to maintain an internal pH level. Its expression is induced by a
specific regulator NhaR, which is also responsible for osmC and pgaA regulation. 
Here I report that the NhaR regulator affects the carbon storage regulatory Csr
system. I found that the expression of all major components of the Csr
system-CsrA regulator, CsrB and CsrC small RNAs, and the CsrB and CsrC stability 
were indirectly affected by nhaR mutation under stress conditions. Using a
combination of experimental and in silico analyses, I concluded that the
mechanism of regulation included direct and indirect activation of a
two-component system (TCS) response regulator-UvrY. NhaR regulation involved
interactions with the regulators H-NS and SdiA and was affected by a naturally
occurring spontaneous IS5 insertion in the promoter region. A regulatory circuit 
was proposed and discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554 
PMCID: PMC6307784
PMID: 30589862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


2. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jun 29;17(7). pii: E979. doi: 10.3390/ijms17070979.

Subinhibitory Concentrations of Allicin Decrease Uropathogenic Escherichia coli
(UPEC) Biofilm Formation, Adhesion Ability, and Swimming Motility.

Yang X(1), Sha K(2), Xu G(3), Tian H(4), Wang X(5), Chen S(6), Wang Y(7), Li
J(8), Chen J(9), Huang N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. fantasyyxl@sina.com.
(2)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. shakaihui@scu.edu.cn.
(3)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. xuguangya@scu.edu.cn.
(4)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. tianhanwen@scu.edu.cn.
(5)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wangxiaoying@scu.edu.cn.
(6)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenshanze@scu.edu.cn.
(7)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wy4504228@163.com.
(8)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. jingyuli@scu.edu.cn.
(9)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenjunlinsf@163.com.
(10)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West 
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. huangpanxiao222@sina.com.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) biofilm formation enables the organism to
avoid the host immune system, resist antibiotics, and provide a reservoir for
persistent infection. Once the biofilm is established, eradication of the
infection becomes difficult. Therefore, strategies against UPEC biofilm are
urgently required. In this study, we investigated the effect of allicin, isolated
from garlic essential oil, on UPEC CFT073 and J96 biofilm formation and
dispersal, along with its effect on UPEC adhesion ability and swimming motility. 
Sub-inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of allicin decreased UPEC biofilm
formation and affected its architecture. Allicin was also capable of dispersing
biofilm. Furthermore, allicin decreased the bacterial adhesion ability and
swimming motility, which are important for biofilm formation. Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) revealed that allicin decreased 
the expression of UPEC type 1 fimbriae adhesin gene fimH. Docking studies
suggested that allicin was located within the binding pocket of heptyl
α-d-mannopyrannoside in FimH and formed hydrogen bonds with Phe1 and Asn135. In
addition, allicin decreased the expression of the two-component regulatory
systems (TCSs) cognate response regulator gene uvrY and increased the expression 
of the RNA binding global regulatory protein gene csrA of UPEC CFT073, which is
associated with UPEC biofilm. The findings suggest that sub-MICs of allicin are
capable of affecting UPEC biofilm formation and dispersal, and decreasing UPEC
adhesion ability and swimming motility.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17070979 
PMCID: PMC4964365
PMID: 27367677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 30;11(6):e0157532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532.
eCollection 2016.

Integration of AI-2 Based Cell-Cell Signaling with Metabolic Cues in Escherichia 
coli.

Mitra A(1), Herren CD(1), Patel IR(1), Coleman A(1), Mukhopadhyay S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

The quorum sensing molecule Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) is generated as a byproduct of
activated methyl cycle by the action of LuxS in Escherichia coli. AI-2 is
synthesized, released and later internalized in a cell-density dependent manner. 
Here, by mutational analysis of the genes, uvrY and csrA, we describe a
regulatory circuit of accumulation and uptake of AI-2. We constructed a
single-copy chromosomal luxS-lacZ fusion in a luxS + merodiploid strain and
evaluated its relative expression in uvrY and csrA mutants. At the entry of
stationary phase, the expression of the fusion and AI-2 accumulation was
positively regulated by uvrY and negatively regulated by csrA respectively. A
deletion of csrA altered message stability of the luxS transcript and CsrA
protein exhibited weak binding to 5' luxS regulatory region. DNA protein
interaction and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed direct
interaction of UvrY with the luxS promoter. Additionally, reduced expression of
the fusion in hfq deletion mutant suggested involvement of small RNA interactions
in luxS regulation. In contrast, the expression of lsrA operon involved in AI-2
uptake, is negatively regulated by uvrY and positively by csrA in a cell-density 
dependent manner. The dual role of csrA in AI-2 synthesis and uptake suggested a 
regulatory crosstalk of cell signaling with carbon regulation in Escherichia
coli. We found that the cAMP-CRP mediated catabolite repression of luxS
expression was uvrY dependent. This study suggests that luxS expression is
complex and regulated at the level of transcription and translation. The
multifactorial regulation supports the notion that cell-cell communication
requires interaction and integration of multiple metabolic signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532 
PMCID: PMC4928848
PMID: 27362507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2015 Mar;197(5):983-91. doi: 10.1128/JB.02325-14. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Effects of the global regulator CsrA on the BarA/UvrY two-component signaling
system.

Camacho MI(1), Alvarez AF(1), Chavez RG(1), Romeo T(2), Merino E(3), Georgellis
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The hybrid sensor kinase BarA and its cognate response regulator UvrY, members of
the two-component signal transduction family, activate transcription of CsrB and 
CsrC noncoding RNAs. These two small RNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding
protein CsrA, which posttranscriptionally regulates translation and/or stability 
of its target mRNAs. Here, we provide evidence that CsrA positively affects,
although indirectly, uvrY expression, at both the transcriptional and
translational levels. We also demonstrate that CsrA is required for properly
switching BarA from its phosphatase to its kinase activity. Thus, the existence
of a feedback loop mechanism that involves the Csr and BarA/UvrY global
regulatory systems is exposed.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02325-14 
PMCID: PMC4325108
PMID: 25535275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Jun;92(5):945-58. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12606. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Global effects of the DEAD-box RNA helicase DeaD (CsdA) on gene expression over a
broad range of temperatures.

Vakulskas CA(1), Pannuri A, Cortés-Selva D, Zere TR, Ahmer BM, Babitzke P, Romeo 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.

In Escherichia coli, activity of the global regulatory RNA binding protein CsrA
is antagonized by two non-coding sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester it away
from its lower affinity mRNA targets. Transcription of csrB/C requires the
BarA-UvrY two component signal transduction system, which responds to short chain
carboxylates. We show that two DEAD-box RNA helicases, DeaD and SrmB, activate
csrB/C expression by different pathways. DeaD facilitates uvrY translation by
counteracting the inhibitory effect of long distance base-pairing between the
uvrY mRNA leader and coding region, while SrmB does not affect UvrY or
UvrY-phosphate levels. Contrary to the prevailing notion that these helicases act
primarily at low temperatures, DeaD and SrmB activated csrB expression over a
wide temperature range. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by
cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) revealed in vivo interactions of
DeaD with 39 mRNAs, including those of uvrY and 9 other regulatory genes. Studies
on the expression of several of the identified genes revealed regulatory effects 
of DeaD in all cases and diverse temperature response patterns. Our findings
uncover an expanded regulatory role for DeaD, which is mediated through novel
mRNA targets, important global regulators and under physiological conditions that
were considered to be incompatible with its function.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12606 
PMCID: PMC4048959
PMID: 24708042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055492. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Pleiotropic roles of uvrY on biofilm formation, motility and virulence in
uropathogenic Escherichia coli CFT073.

Mitra A(1), Palaniyandi S, Herren CD, Zhu X, Mukhopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

Urinary tract infections primarily caused by uropathogenic strains of Escherichia
coli (E. coli) remain a significant public health problem in both developed and
developing countries. An important virulence determinant in uropathogenesis is
biofilm formation which requires expression of fimbriae, flagella, and other
surface components such as lipopolysaccharides. In this study, we explored the
regulation of uvrY and csrA genes in biofilm formation, motility and virulence
determinants in uropathogenic E. coli. We found that mutation in uvrY suppressed 
biofilm formation on abiotic surfaces such as polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene and
glass, and complementation of uvrY in the mutant restored the biofilm phenotype. 
We further evaluated the role of uvrY gene in expression of type 1 fimbriae, an
important adhesin that facilitates adhesion to various abiotic surfaces. We found
that phase variation of type 1 fimbriae between fimbriated and afimbriated mode
was modulated by uvrY at its transcriptional level. Deletion mutant of uvrY
lowered expression of fimbrial recombinase genes, such as fimB, fimE, and fimA, a
gene encoding major fimbrial subunit. Furthermore, transcription of virulence
specific genes such as papA, hlyB and galU was also reduced in the deletion
mutant. Swarming motility and expression of flhD and flhC was also diminished in 
the mutant. Taken together, our findings unravel a possible mechanism in which
uvrY facilitates biofilm formation, persistence and virulence of uropathogenic E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055492 
PMCID: PMC3562240
PMID: 23383333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

BarA-UvrY two-component system regulates virulence of uropathogenic E. coli
CFT073.

Palaniyandi S(1), Mitra A, Herren CD, Lockatell CV, Johnson DE, Zhu X,
Mukhopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), a member of extraintestinal pathogenic E. 
coli, cause ∼80% of community-acquired urinary tract infections (UTI) in humans. 
UPEC initiates its colonization in epithelial cells lining the urinary tract with
a complicated life cycle, replicating and persisting in intracellular and
extracellular niches. Consequently, UPEC causes cystitis and more severe form of 
pyelonephritis. To further understand the virulence characteristics of UPEC, we
investigated the roles of BarA-UvrY two-component system (TCS) in regulating UPEC
virulence. Our results showed that mutation of BarA-UvrY TCS significantly
decreased the virulence of UPEC CFT073, as assessed by mouse urinary tract
infection, chicken embryo killing assay, and cytotoxicity assay on human kidney
and uroepithelial cell lines. Furthermore, mutation of either barA or uvrY gene
reduced the production of hemolysin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proinflammatory
cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) and chemokine (IL-8). The virulence phenotype was
restored similar to that of wild-type by complementation of either barA or uvrY
gene in trans. In addition, we discussed a possible link between the BarA-UvrY
TCS and CsrA in positively and negatively controlling virulence in UPEC. Overall,
this study provides the evidences for BarA-UvrY TCS regulates the virulence of
UPEC CFT073 and may point to mechanisms by which virulence regulations are
observed in different ways may control the long-term survival of UPEC in the
urinary tract.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348 
PMCID: PMC3283629
PMID: 22363626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Sep;67(17):2897-908. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z. Epub
2010 May 6.

Post-transcriptional global regulation by CsrA in bacteria.

Timmermans J(1), Van Melderen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie Bactérienne, Institut de Biologie et
de Médecine Moléculaires, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 12
rue des Professeurs Jeener et Brachet, 6041, Gosselies, Belgium.

Global regulation allows bacteria to rapidly modulate the expression of a large
variety of unrelated genes in response to environmental changes. Global
regulators act at different levels of gene expression. This review focuses on
CsrA, a post-transcriptional regulator that affects translation of its gene
targets by binding mRNAs. CsrA controls a large variety of physiological
processes such as central carbon metabolism, motility and biofilm formation. The 
activity of CsrA is itself tightly regulated by the CsrB and CsrC small RNAs and 
the BarA-UvrY two-component system.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z 
PMID: 20446015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((uvrY) AND (uvrY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 18;12:697803. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.697803.
eCollection 2021.

Single-Target Regulators Constitute the Minority Group of Transcription Factors
in Escherichia coli K-12.

Shimada T(1), Ogasawara H(2)(3), Kobayashi I(1), Kobayashi N(4), Ishihama
A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kawasaki, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Supports to Advanced Science, Division of Gene Research,
Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Fungal and Microbial Dynamism, Shinshu University, Nagano,
Japan.
(4)Department of Frontier Science, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.
(5)Micro-Nano Technology Research Center, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.

The identification of regulatory targets of all transcription factors (TFs) is
critical for understanding the entire network of genome regulation. A total of
approximately 300 TFs exist in the model prokaryote Escherichia coli K-12, but
the identification of whole sets of their direct targets is impossible with use
of in vivo approaches. For this end, the most direct and quick approach is to
identify the TF-binding sites in vitro on the genome. We then developed and
utilized the gSELEX screening system in vitro for identification of more than 150
E. coli TF-binding sites along the E. coli genome. Based on the number of
predicted regulatory targets, we classified E. coli K-12 TFs into four groups,
altogether forming a hierarchy ranging from a single-target TF (ST-TF) to local
TFs, global TFs, and nucleoid-associated TFs controlling as many as 1,000
targets. Using the collection of purified TFs and a library of genome DNA
segments from a single and the same E. coli K-12, we identified here a total of
11 novel ST-TFs, CsqR, CusR, HprR, NorR, PepA, PutA, QseA, RspR, UvrY, ZraR, and 
YqhC. The regulation of single-target promoters was analyzed in details for the
hitherto uncharacterized QseA and RspR. In most cases, the ST-TF gene and its
regulatory target genes are adjacently located on the E. coli K-12 genome,
implying their simultaneous transfer in the course of genome evolution. The newly
identified 11 ST-TFs and the total of 13 hitherto identified altogether
constitute the minority group of TFs in E. coli K-12.

Copyright © 2021 Shimada, Ogasawara, Kobayashi, Kobayashi and Ishihama.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.697803 
PMCID: PMC8249747
PMID: 34220787 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 29;117(52):33530-33539. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2006209117. Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Identification of Z nucleotides as an ancient signal for two-component system
activation in bacteria.

Vázquez-Ciros OJ(1), Alvarez AF(1), Georgellis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, 04510 Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, 04510 Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

Two-component systems (TCSs) in bacteria are molecular circuits that allow the
perception of and response to diverse stimuli. These signaling circuits rely on
phosphoryl-group transfers between transmitter and receiver domains of sensor
kinase and response regulator proteins, and regulate several cellular processes
in response to internal or external cues. Phosphorylation, and thereby
activation, of response regulators has been demonstrated to occur by their
cognate histidine kinases but also by low molecular weight phosphodonors such as 
acetyl phosphate and carbamoyl phosphate. Here, we present data indicating that
the intermediates of the de novo syntheses of purines and histidine,
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl 5'-monophosphate (ZMP)
and/or 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl 5'-triphosphate
(ZTP), activate the response regulator UvrY, by promoting its autophosphorylation
at the conserved aspartate at position 54. Moreover, these Z nucleotides are
shown to also activate the nonrelated response regulators ArcA, CpxR, RcsB, and
PhoQ. We propose that ZMP and/or ZTP act as alarmones for a wide range of
response regulators in vivo, providing a novel mechanism by which they could
impact gene expression in response to metabolic cues.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2006209117 
PMCID: PMC7777188
PMID: 33318202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


3. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Sep;22:785-791. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.06.014.
Epub 2020 Jun 30.

An insight into the genome of extensively drug-resistant and uropathogenic
Citrobacter werkmanii.

Parvez S(1), Khan AU(2), Kaur G(3), Barakat M(4), Ortet P(4), Mayilraj S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Interdisciplinary
Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh 202 002, Uttar
Pradesh, India; Central Instrumentation Facility, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
110 025, India. Electronic address: shadab.prvz@gmail.com.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Interdisciplinary
Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh 202 002, Uttar
Pradesh, India. Electronic address: asad.k@rediffmail.com.
(3)MTCC-Microbial Type Culture Collection & Gene Bank, CSIR-Institute of
Microbial Technology, Chandigarh 160 036, India.
(4)Aix-Marseille Université, CEA, CNRS, LEMiRE, UMR 7265, BIAM,
Saint-Paul-lez-Durance, France.

OBJECTIVE: Carbapenemase-producing bacteria pose a serious public-health threat. 
This study was performed to understand the emergence and genetic features of
NDM-producers in hospital setting.
METHODS: Samples were collected from a tertiary-care hospital. Isolate
identification was performed by 16S rRNA sequencing. The genome of Citrobacter
werkmanii (AK-8) was sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform. Resistance
determinants and pathogenicity islands were determined by ResFinder and
PathogenFinder, respectively. MLST, two-component systems and transcription
factors were identified by P2RP server, whilst variant calling and insertion
sequence (IS) elements were determined by Galaxy and ISfinder, respectively. The 
genome of AK-8 was compared with uropathogenic Escherichia coli strain 536.
RESULTS: This is the first report on whole-genome analysis of extensively
drug-resistant NDM-6-producing uropathogenic C. werkmanii ST-104. Resistance
genes for all antibiotics except colistin, fosfomycin, fusidic- acid,
nitroimidazole, oxazolidinones, tetracycline and glycopeptides were detected in
this strain. Genome analysis of AK-8 led to the identification of the BaeSR
two-component system regulating production of multidrug efflux proteins.
Virulence was regulated by CpxRA, ZraRS, RstAB, UhpAB, AcrAB, RcsBc and UvrY,
whereas Bar-UvrY was found to control carbon metabolism, flagellum biosynthesis
and biofilm formation. The AK-8 genome encodes 21 chemoreceptors involved in
colonisation and pathogenesis. Fur family transcriptional regulator, cAMP
receptor protein and RpoS were found to increase the virulence of AK-8. ntBLAST
analysis showed 69.60% genetic identity with E. coli 536 as an adaptive feature
for survival.
CONCLUSION: The emergence of extensively drug-resistant pathogenic C. werkmanii
is alarming and it should not be ignored as commensal.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.06.014 
PMID: 32619689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 27;13(12):e0209554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554.
eCollection 2018.

Regulatory loop between the CsrA system and NhaR, a high salt/high pH regulator.

Król JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

In E. coli, under high pH/high salt conditions, a major Na+/H+ antiporter (NhaA) 
is activated to maintain an internal pH level. Its expression is induced by a
specific regulator NhaR, which is also responsible for osmC and pgaA regulation. 
Here I report that the NhaR regulator affects the carbon storage regulatory Csr
system. I found that the expression of all major components of the Csr
system-CsrA regulator, CsrB and CsrC small RNAs, and the CsrB and CsrC stability 
were indirectly affected by nhaR mutation under stress conditions. Using a
combination of experimental and in silico analyses, I concluded that the
mechanism of regulation included direct and indirect activation of a
two-component system (TCS) response regulator-UvrY. NhaR regulation involved
interactions with the regulators H-NS and SdiA and was affected by a naturally
occurring spontaneous IS5 insertion in the promoter region. A regulatory circuit 
was proposed and discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554 
PMCID: PMC6307784
PMID: 30589862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


5. Vet World. 2018 Jun;11(6):859-867. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2018.859-867. Epub 2018
Jun 27.

Molecular characterization and antibiotic resistance patterns of avian fecal
Escherichia coli from turkeys, geese, and ducks.

Dube N(1), Mbanga J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Applied Sciences,
National University of Science and Technology, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe.

Background and Aim: Avian fecal Escherichia coli (AFEC) are considered to be the 
natural reservoir of pathogenic strains in extraintestinal infections as such
characterization of AFEC gives insight into the spread of the potential
pathogenic lineage. The aim of the study was to investigate the reservoirs of
avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC) from fecal samples of healthy ducks, geese, and
turkeys by determining the antibiotic resistance patterns of AFEC isolates from
turkeys, geese and ducks and characterization of the isolates using virulence
genes, plasmid profiles, and phylogenetic grouping.
Materials and Methods: The disc diffusion method was used to determine antibiotic
resistance of 100 AFEC isolates from turkeys (9), geese (29), and ducks (62) to 8
antibiotics. Molecular characterization of the isolates was done by multiplex
polymerase chain reaction to investigate the presence of 12 virulence genes,
plasmid profiling, and phylogenetic grouping based on the 16S rRNA sequences.
Results: Antibiogram profiles indicated maximum resistance to cloxacillin (100%) 
and bacitracin (100%) for all AFEC isolates and high sensitivity to
ciprofloxacin; however, all isolates exhibited multi-drug resistance. The AFEC
isolates from turkeys (6) and geese (12) did not contain virulence genes. The frz
(3.7%), sitD (29.6%), and fimH (92.5%) were detected in the duck isolates. None
of the isolates had the KpsM, iutA, vat, sitA, hlyF, pstB, ompT, uvrY, and sopB
genes. Plasmid profiling gave four plasmid profiles with the plasmids ranging
from 1.5 to 55 kb. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA sequences revealed
similarities between AFEC isolates from the different poultry species, as the
isolates did not cluster according to avian species.
Conclusion: AFEC isolates are potential reservoirs of APEC as they contain some
of the virulence genes associated with APEC. Multidrug resistance is high in AFEC
isolated from healthy birds. This is a public health concern.

DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2018.859-867 
PMCID: PMC6048085
PMID: 30034182 


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 May 8;115(19):E4483-E4492. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1722246115. Epub 2018 Apr 23.

Reduction in adaptor amounts establishes degradation hierarchy among protease
substrates.

Yeom J(1), Gao X(1), Groisman EA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06536.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06536; eduardo.groisman@yale.edu.
(3)Yale Microbial Sciences Institute, West Haven, CT 06516.

ATP-dependent proteases control critical cellular processes, including
development, physiology, and virulence. A given protease may recognize a
substrate directly via an unfoldase domain or subunit or indirectly via an
adaptor that delivers the substrate to the unfoldase. We now report that cells
achieve differential stability among substrates of a given protease by modulating
adaptor amounts. We establish that the regulatory protein PhoP represses
transcription of the gene specifying the ClpAP protease adaptor ClpS when the
bacteria Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli experience low cytoplasmic Mg2+
The resulting decrease in ClpS amounts diminishes proteolysis of several
ClpSAP-dependent substrates, including the putrescine aminotransferase Oat, which
heightens the formation of antibiotic persisters, and the transcriptional
regulators UvrY and PhoP, which alter the expression of genes controlled by these
proteins. By contrast, the decrease in ClpS amounts did not impact the abundance 
of the ClpSAP substrate FtsA, reflecting that FtsA binds to ClpS more tightly
than to UvrY and PhoP. Our findings show how physiological conditions that reduce
adaptor amounts modify the abundance of selected substrates of a given protease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1722246115 
PMCID: PMC5948988
PMID: 29686082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


7. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jun 29;17(7). pii: E979. doi: 10.3390/ijms17070979.

Subinhibitory Concentrations of Allicin Decrease Uropathogenic Escherichia coli
(UPEC) Biofilm Formation, Adhesion Ability, and Swimming Motility.

Yang X(1), Sha K(2), Xu G(3), Tian H(4), Wang X(5), Chen S(6), Wang Y(7), Li
J(8), Chen J(9), Huang N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. fantasyyxl@sina.com.
(2)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. shakaihui@scu.edu.cn.
(3)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. xuguangya@scu.edu.cn.
(4)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. tianhanwen@scu.edu.cn.
(5)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wangxiaoying@scu.edu.cn.
(6)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenshanze@scu.edu.cn.
(7)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wy4504228@163.com.
(8)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. jingyuli@scu.edu.cn.
(9)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenjunlinsf@163.com.
(10)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West 
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. huangpanxiao222@sina.com.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) biofilm formation enables the organism to
avoid the host immune system, resist antibiotics, and provide a reservoir for
persistent infection. Once the biofilm is established, eradication of the
infection becomes difficult. Therefore, strategies against UPEC biofilm are
urgently required. In this study, we investigated the effect of allicin, isolated
from garlic essential oil, on UPEC CFT073 and J96 biofilm formation and
dispersal, along with its effect on UPEC adhesion ability and swimming motility. 
Sub-inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of allicin decreased UPEC biofilm
formation and affected its architecture. Allicin was also capable of dispersing
biofilm. Furthermore, allicin decreased the bacterial adhesion ability and
swimming motility, which are important for biofilm formation. Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) revealed that allicin decreased 
the expression of UPEC type 1 fimbriae adhesin gene fimH. Docking studies
suggested that allicin was located within the binding pocket of heptyl
α-d-mannopyrannoside in FimH and formed hydrogen bonds with Phe1 and Asn135. In
addition, allicin decreased the expression of the two-component regulatory
systems (TCSs) cognate response regulator gene uvrY and increased the expression 
of the RNA binding global regulatory protein gene csrA of UPEC CFT073, which is
associated with UPEC biofilm. The findings suggest that sub-MICs of allicin are
capable of affecting UPEC biofilm formation and dispersal, and decreasing UPEC
adhesion ability and swimming motility.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17070979 
PMCID: PMC4964365
PMID: 27367677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 30;11(6):e0157532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532.
eCollection 2016.

Integration of AI-2 Based Cell-Cell Signaling with Metabolic Cues in Escherichia 
coli.

Mitra A(1), Herren CD(1), Patel IR(1), Coleman A(1), Mukhopadhyay S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

The quorum sensing molecule Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) is generated as a byproduct of
activated methyl cycle by the action of LuxS in Escherichia coli. AI-2 is
synthesized, released and later internalized in a cell-density dependent manner. 
Here, by mutational analysis of the genes, uvrY and csrA, we describe a
regulatory circuit of accumulation and uptake of AI-2. We constructed a
single-copy chromosomal luxS-lacZ fusion in a luxS + merodiploid strain and
evaluated its relative expression in uvrY and csrA mutants. At the entry of
stationary phase, the expression of the fusion and AI-2 accumulation was
positively regulated by uvrY and negatively regulated by csrA respectively. A
deletion of csrA altered message stability of the luxS transcript and CsrA
protein exhibited weak binding to 5' luxS regulatory region. DNA protein
interaction and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed direct
interaction of UvrY with the luxS promoter. Additionally, reduced expression of
the fusion in hfq deletion mutant suggested involvement of small RNA interactions
in luxS regulation. In contrast, the expression of lsrA operon involved in AI-2
uptake, is negatively regulated by uvrY and positively by csrA in a cell-density 
dependent manner. The dual role of csrA in AI-2 synthesis and uptake suggested a 
regulatory crosstalk of cell signaling with carbon regulation in Escherichia
coli. We found that the cAMP-CRP mediated catabolite repression of luxS
expression was uvrY dependent. This study suggests that luxS expression is
complex and regulated at the level of transcription and translation. The
multifactorial regulation supports the notion that cell-cell communication
requires interaction and integration of multiple metabolic signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532 
PMCID: PMC4928848
PMID: 27362507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((xapR) AND (nupG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5506-16.

Identification and characterization of genes (xapA, xapB, and xapR) involved in
xanthosine catabolism in Escherichia coli.

Seeger C(1), Poulsen C, Dandanell G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

We have characterized four genes from the 52-min region on the Escherichia coli
linkage map. Three of these genes are directly involved in the metabolism of
xanthosine, whereas the function of the fourth gene is unknown. One of the genes 
(xapA) encodes xanthosine phosphorylase. The second gene, named xapB, encodes a
polypeptide that shows strong similarity to the nucleoside transport protein
NupG. The genes xapA and xapB are located clockwise of a gene identified as xapR,
which encodes a positive regulator belonging to the LysR family and is required
for the expression of xapA and xapB. The genes xapA and xapB form an operon, and 
their expression was strictly dependent on the presence of both the XapR protein 
and the inducer xanthosine. Expression of the xapR gene is constitutive and not
autoregulated, unlike the case for many other LysR family proteins. In minicells,
the XapB polypeptide was found primarily in the membrane fraction, indicating
that XapB is a transport protein like NupG and is involved in the transport of
xanthosine.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.19.5506-5516.1995 
PMCID: PMC177358
PMID: 7559336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((xynR) AND (xynR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2017 Dec 1;364(22). doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnx220.

Regulatory role of XynR (YagI) in catabolism of xylonate in Escherichia coli
K-12.

Shimada T(1)(2), Momiyama E(3), Yamanaka Y(1)(3), Watanabe H(3), Yamamoto
K(1)(3), Ishihama A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Kajino-cho 3-7-2,
Koganei, Tokyo 184-0003, Japan.
(2)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571,
Japan.
(3)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Kajino-cho 3-7-2,
Koganei, Tokyo 184-0003, Japan.

The genome of Escherichia coli K-12 contains ten cryptic phages, altogether
constituting about 3.6% of the genome in sequence. Among more than 200 predicted 
genes in these cryptic phages, 14 putative transcription factor (TF) genes exist,
but their regulatory functions remain unidentified. As an initial attempt to make
a breakthrough for understanding the regulatory roles of cryptic phage-encoded
TFs, we tried to identify the regulatory function of CP4-6 cryptic
prophage-encoded YagI with unknown function. After SELEX screening, YagI was
found to bind mainly at a single site within the spacer of bidirectional
transcription units, yagA (encoding another uncharacterized TF) and yagEF
(encoding 2-keto-3-deoxy gluconate aldolase, and dehydratase, respectively)
within this prophage region. YagEF enzymes are involved in the catabolism of
xylose downstream from xylonate. We then designated YagI as XynR (regulator of
xylonate catabolism), one of the rare single-target TFs. In agreement with this
predicted regulatory function, the activity of XynR was suggested to be
controlled by xylonate. Even though low-affinity binding sites of XynR were
identified in the E. coli K-12 genome, they all were inside open reading frames, 
implying that the regulation network of XynR is still fixed within the CR4-6
prophage without significant influence over the host E. coli K-12.

© FEMS 2017. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnx220 
PMID: 29087459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2003 Apr;185(7):2219-26.

Involvement of the multidomain regulatory protein XynR in positive control of
xylanase gene expression in the ruminal anaerobe Prevotella bryantii B(1)4.

Miyazaki K(1), Miyamoto H, Mercer DK, Hirase T, Martin JC, Kojima Y, Flint HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Science, Kyoto Prefectural University, Shimogamo, Kyoto
606-8522, Japan.

The xylanase gene cluster from the rumen anaerobe Prevotella bryantii B(1)4 was
found to include a gene (xynR) that encodes a multidomain regulatory protein and 
is downstream from the xylanase and beta-xylosidase genes xynA and xynB.
Additional genes identified upstream of xynA and xynB include xynD, which encodes
an integral membrane protein that has homology with Na:solute symporters; xynE,
which is related to the genes encoding acylhydrolases and arylesterases; and
xynF, which has homology with the genes encoding alpha-glucuronidases. XynR
includes, in a single 833-amino-acid polypeptide, a putative input domain
unrelated to other database sequences, a likely transmembrane domain, histidine
kinase motifs, response regulator sequences, and a C-terminal AraC-type
helix-turn-helix DNA binding domain. Two transcripts (3.7 and 5.8 kb) were
detected with a xynA probe, and the start site of the 3.7-kb transcript encoding 
xynABD was mapped to a position upstream of xynD. The DNA binding domain of XynR 
was purified after amplification and overexpression in Escherichia coli and was
found to bind to a 141-bp DNA fragment from the region immediately upstream of
xynD. In vitro transcription assays demonstrated that XynR stimulates
transcription of the 3.7-kb transcript. We concluded that XynR acts as a positive
regulator that activates expression of xynABD in P. bryantii B(1)4. This is the
first regulatory protein that demonstrates significant homology with the
two-component regulatory protein superfamily and has been shown to be involved in
the regulation of polysaccharidase gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.7.2219-2226.2003 
PMCID: PMC151492
PMID: 12644492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ycjW) AND (ycjW)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nat Commun. 2019 Jun 28;10(1):2868. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-10785-x.

Transcription factor YcjW controls the emergency H2S production in E. coli.

Luhachack L(1), Rasouly A(1)(2), Shamovsky I(1), Nudler E(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, 10016, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA. Evgeny.Nudler@nyumc.org.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, 10016, USA. Evgeny.Nudler@nyumc.org.

Prokaryotes and eukaryotes alike endogenously generate the gaseous molecule
hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Bacterial H2S acts as a cytoprotectant against
antibiotics-induced stress and promotes redox homeostasis. In E. coli, endogenous
H2S production is primarily dependent on 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase
(3MST), encoded by mstA. Here, we show that cells lacking 3MST acquire a
phenotypic suppressor mutation resulting in compensatory H2S production and
tolerance to antibiotics and oxidative stress. Using whole genome sequencing, we 
identified a non-synonymous mutation within an uncharacterized LacI-type
transcription factor, ycjW. We then mapped regulatory targets of YcjW and
discovered it controls the expression of carbohydrate metabolic genes and
thiosulfate sulfurtransferase PspE. Induction of pspE expression in the
suppressor strain provides an alternative mechanism for H2S biosynthesis. Our
results reveal a complex interaction between carbohydrate metabolism and H2S
production in bacteria and the role, a hitherto uncharacterized transcription
factor, YcjW, plays in linking the two.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-10785-x 
PMCID: PMC6599011
PMID: 31253770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ydcI) AND (ydcI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Sep;166(9):880-890. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000947.

Novel regulators of the csgD gene encoding the master regulator of biofilm
formation in Escherichia coli K-12.

Ogasawara H(1)(2), Ishizuka T(2), Hotta S(2), Aoki M(2), Shimada T(3), Ishihama
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Assembly School of Humanities and Social Sciences Institute of
Humanities, Shinshu University, Asahi 3-1-1, Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Supports to Advanced Science, Division of Gene Research,
Shinshu University, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan.
(3)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashi Mita, Tama-ku,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo
184-8584, Japan.

Under stressful conditions, Escherichia coli forms biofilm for survival by
sensing a variety of environmental conditions. CsgD, the master regulator of
biofilm formation, controls cell aggregation by directly regulating the synthesis
of Curli fimbriae. In agreement of its regulatory role, as many as 14
transcription factors (TFs) have so far been identified to participate in
regulation of the csgD promoter, each monitoring a specific environmental
condition or factor. In order to identify the whole set of TFs involved in this
typical multi-factor promoter, we performed in this study 'promoter-specific
transcription-factor' (PS-TF) screening in vitro using a set of 198 purified TFs 
(145 TFs with known functions and 53 hitherto uncharacterized TFs). A total of 48
TFs with strong binding to the csgD promoter probe were identified, including 35 
known TFs and 13 uncharacterized TFs, referred to as Y-TFs. As an attempt to
search for novel regulators, in this study we first analysed a total of seven
Y-TFs, including YbiH, YdcI, YhjC, YiaJ, YiaU, YjgJ and YjiR. After analysis of
curli fimbriae formation, LacZ-reporter assay, Northern-blot analysis and biofilm
formation assay, we identified at least two novel regulators, repressor YiaJ
(renamed PlaR) and activator YhjC (renamed RcdB), of the csgD promoter.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000947 
PMID: 32649279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2020 Aug;113(8):1109-1122. doi:
10.1007/s10482-020-01412-7. Epub 2020 May 17.

Phenotypes, transcriptome, and novel biofilm formation associated with the ydcI
gene.

Romiyo V(1), Wilson JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Villanova University, 800 Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, 
PA, 19085, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Villanova University, 800 Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, 
PA, 19085, USA. james.w.wilson@villanova.edu.

The ydcI gene has previously been shown to encode a DNA-binding protein involved 
with acid stress resistance and induced biofilm formation in a strain of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. In addition, characterisation of the
ydcI gene in Escherichia coli and other bacteria demonstrated strikingly
different tolerance for induced ydcI expression across Gram negative species. In 
this report, we investigated the conservation of these phenotypes across multiple
strains of S. Typhimurium and E. coli, and we used RNA Seq to identify the
transcriptome of the ΔydcI mutant compared to WT in S. Typhimurium and E. coli
(to establish the YdcI regulon in each species). We constructed deletion mutants 
in each species based on the RNA Seq results and tested these mutants for the
relevant ydcI-related phenotypes. Though no evidence for a role in these
phenotypes was found via the RNA Seq deletion mutants, we found that the
ydcI-induced biofilm in S. Typhimurium is formed independently of the major
biofilm genes csgA and bcsA indicating a potentially novel type of biofilm
formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-020-01412-7 
PMID: 32419108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Feb 25;117(8):4152-4157. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1914741117. Epub 2020 Feb 6.

Loss of phenotypic inheritance associated with ydcI mutation leads to increased
frequency of small, slow persisters in Escherichia coli.

Hingley-Wilson SM(1), Ma N(1)(2), Hu Y(3), Casey R(1), Bramming A(4), Curry
RJ(5), Tang HL(3), Wu H(1), Butler RE(1), Jacobs WR Jr(6)(7), Rocco A(8),
McFadden J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Cellular Sciences, School of Biosciences and
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7XH, United Kingdom.
(2)Advanced Technology Institute, Department of Electronic Engineering,
University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, 
University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5320 Ribe,
Denmark.
(5)Photon Science Institute, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461; j.mcfadden@surrey.ac.uk william.jacobs@einsteinmed.org
a.rocco@surrey.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461.
(8)Department of Microbial and Cellular Sciences, School of Biosciences and
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7XH, United Kingdom; j.mcfadden@surrey.ac.uk william.jacobs@einsteinmed.org
a.rocco@surrey.ac.uk.

Whenever a genetically homogenous population of bacterial cells is exposed to
antibiotics, a tiny fraction of cells survives the treatment, the phenomenon
known as bacterial persistence [G.L. Hobby et al., Exp. Biol. Med. 50, 281-285
(1942); J. Bigger, The Lancet 244, 497-500 (1944)]. Despite its biomedical
relevance, the origin of the phenomenon is still unknown, and as a rare,
phenotypically resistant subpopulation, persisters are notoriously hard to study 
and define. Using computerized tracking we show that persisters are small at
birth and slowly replicating. We also determine that the high-persister mutant
strain of Escherichia coli, HipQ, is associated with the phenotype of reduced
phenotypic inheritance (RPI). We identify the gene responsible for RPI, ydcI,
which encodes a transcription factor, and propose a mechanism whereby loss of
phenotypic inheritance causes increased frequency of persisters. These results
provide insight into the generation and maintenance of phenotypic variation and
provide potential targets for the development of therapeutic strategies that
tackle persistence in bacterial infections.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1914741117 
PMCID: PMC7049120
PMID: 32029596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 16;46(20):10682-10696. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky752.

Systematic discovery of uncharacterized transcription factors in Escherichia coli
K-12 MG1655.

Gao Y(1)(2), Yurkovich JT(2)(3), Seo SW(4), Kabimoldayev I(5), Dräger A(6)(7),
Chen K(2), Sastry AV(2), Fang X(2), Mih N(2)(3), Yang L(2), Eichner J(6), Cho
BK(8)(9), Kim D(5)(10)(11), Palsson BO(2)(3)(8)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Genetic Engineering and Graduate School of Biotechnology,
College of Life Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea.
(6)Computational Systems Biology of Infection and Antimicrobial-Resistant
Pathogens, Center for Bioinformatics Tübingen (ZBIT), 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany.
(8)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, 2800 Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.
(10)School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(11)School of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and
Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Transcriptional regulation enables cells to respond to environmental changes. Of 
the estimated 304 candidate transcription factors (TFs) in Escherichia coli K-12 
MG1655, 185 have been experimentally identified, but ChIP methods have been used 
to fully characterize only a few dozen. Identifying these remaining TFs is key to
improving our knowledge of the E. coli transcriptional regulatory network (TRN). 
Here, we developed an integrated workflow for the computational prediction and
comprehensive experimental validation of TFs using a suite of genome-wide
experiments. We applied this workflow to (i) identify 16 candidate TFs from over 
a hundred uncharacterized genes; (ii) capture a total of 255 DNA binding peaks
for ten candidate TFs resulting in six high-confidence binding motifs; (iii)
reconstruct the regulons of these ten TFs by determining gene expression changes 
upon deletion of each TF and (iv) identify the regulatory roles of three TFs
(YiaJ, YdcI, and YeiE) as regulators of l-ascorbate utilization, proton transfer 
and acetate metabolism, and iron homeostasis under iron-limited conditions,
respectively. Together, these results demonstrate how this workflow can be used
to discover, characterize, and elucidate regulatory functions of uncharacterized 
TFs in parallel.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky752 
PMCID: PMC6237786
PMID: 30137486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Microbiol. 2014 Nov;69(5):640-8. doi: 10.1007/s00284-014-0631-7. Epub 2014
Jun 25.

Bacterial genus-specific tolerance for YdcI expression.

Solomon L(1), Shah A, Hannagan S, Wilson JW.

Author information: 
(1)Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA.

The bacterial ydcI gene encodes a highly conserved transcriptional regulatory
protein found in a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria and is involved in a
number of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phenotypes. Given its high
conservation, the YdcI protein has the potential for studies and applications
across bacterial genera. However, no studies have been performed with YdcI
outside of S. Typhimurium. Here we report that different Gram-negative genera
display dramatically different tolerances for YdcI expression. In non-tolerant
genera, YdcI expression results in rapid loss of cell viability several log-fold 
in magnitude, and the viability loss is observed at YdcI levels that are
physiologically relevant. The N-terminal and C-terminal halves can be exchanged
between the S. Typhimurium and Escherichia coli YdcI proteins with the resulting 
proteins still displaying the differential tolerance phenotype. Comparison of
YdcI expression from the respective chromosomal gene in S. Typhimurium and E.
coli revealed much lower levels in E. coli suggesting that this species has
evolved a lower endogenous YdcI expression level and does not tolerate increases 
above this level. Expression of YdcI resulted in increased sensitivity to a range
of antibiotics indicating the possibility that this protein could augment
antibacterial strategies in non-tolerant genera. Overall, the results indicate
vastly different outcomes for YdcI expression depending on bacterial genus and
unmask differences in YdcI expression, regulation, target interactions, and/or
YdcI regulon activity in different bacteria. The results also impact future work 
on YdcI when the protein is being studied/expressed in different Gram-negative
genera.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-014-0631-7 
PMID: 24962596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ydcR) AND (ydcR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Aug;87(5):1895-905. doi:
10.1007/s00253-010-2638-8. Epub 2010 May 18.

All genomic mutations in the antimicrobial surfactant-resistant mutant,
Escherichia coli OW66, are involved in cell resistance to surfactant.

Nakata K(1), Koh MM, Tsuchido T, Matsumura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kansai University, 3-3-35
Yamate-cho, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan.

The spontaneous antimicrobial surfactant-resistant mutant, Escherichia coli OW66,
has been isolated, and its physiological properties have been characterized in
our previous paper (Ishikawa et al., J Appl Microbiol 92:261-268, 2002b). This
report revealed that strain OW66 had seven mutations in their chromosomal DNA by 
comparative genomic hybridization microarray, and that their alternative
functions were involved in cell resistance to antimicrobial surfactants. These
mutations were located in oppB, ydcR, IVR(vacJ-yfdC), rpoN, rpoB, rpoC, and soxR.
Furthermore, seven of the single-mutated isogenic strains and seven of the
six-mutated isogenic strains were constructed from strains OW6 (NBRC106482) and
OW66, respectively, through homologous recombination, and their resistances to an
antimicrobial surfactant were measured using the minimum inhibitory concentration
method. These results revealed that all six-mutated strains were more sensitive
than strain OW66, and that the soxR66 mutation was independently involved in
antimicrobial surfactant resistance of E. coli cells. Expression of soxR66 and
soxS was increased in both strains OW66 and OW6-soxR66 without the surfactant
treatment by the quantitative real time-polymerase chain reaction analysis,
compared with strain OW6. Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
analysis also revealed that some proteins in the soxRS regulon, including Mn-SOD,
were overexpressed in both strains OW66 and OW6-soxR66. These results indicate
that the soxR66 mutation leads to the constitutive expression of the soxRS
regulon, resulting in the acquired resistance of E. coli cells to an
antimicrobial surfactant.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-010-2638-8 
PMID: 20480162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ydjF) AND (ydjF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Jul;41(1):59-71.

Alkaline shock induces the Bacillus subtilis sigma(W) regulon.

Wiegert T(1), Homuth G, Versteeg S, Schumann W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, D-95440 Bayreuth, Germany.
thomas.wiegert@uni-bayreuth.de

When confronted with a stress factor, bacteria react with a specific stress
response, a genetically encoded programme resulting in the transiently enhanced
expression of a subset of genes. One of these stress factors is a sudden increase
in the external pH. As a first step to understand the response of Bacillus
subtilis cells towards an alkali shock at the transcriptional level, we attempted
to identify alkali-inducible genes using the DNA macroarray technique. To define 
the appropriate challenging conditions, we used the ydjF gene, the orthologue of 
the Escherichia coli pspA, as a model gene for an alkali-inducible gene.
Hybridization of 33P-labelled cDNA to a DNA macroarray revealed induction of more
than 80 genes by a sudden increase in the external pH value from 6.3 to 8.9. It
was discovered that a large subset of these genes belong to the recently
described sigmaW regulon, which was confirmed by the analysis of a sigW knockout.
A comparison of B. subtilis wild type with the congenic sigW knockout also led to
the discovery of new members of the sigmaW regulon. In addition, we found several
genes clearly not belonging to that regulon. This analysis represents the first
report of an extracellular stimulus inducing the sigmaW regulon.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02489.x 
PMID: 11454200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((yebK) AND (yebK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0131928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131928.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Functions and Regulation of Cryptic Cellobiose Operons in Escherichia coli.

Parisutham V(1), Lee SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
(UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
(UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea; School of Energy and Chemical Engineering,
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of
Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(11):e0143463.

Presence of cellobiose as a sole carbon source induces mutations in the chb and
asc operons of Escherichia coli and allows it to grow on cellobiose. We
previously engineered these two operons with synthetic constitutive promoters and
achieved efficient cellobiose metabolism through adaptive evolution. In this
study, we characterized two mutations observed in the efficient cellobiose
metabolizing strain: duplication of RBS of ascB gene, (β-glucosidase of asc
operon) and nonsense mutation in yebK, (an uncharacterized transcription factor).
Mutations in yebK play a dominant role by modulating the length of lag phase,
relative to the growth rate of the strain when transferred from a rich medium to 
minimal cellobiose medium. Mutations in ascB, on the other hand, are specific for
cellobiose and help in enhancing the specific growth rate. Taken together, our
results show that ascB of the asc operon is controlled by an internal putative
promoter in addition to the native cryptic promoter, and the transcription factor
yebK helps to remodel the host physiology for cellobiose metabolism. While
previous studies characterized the stress-induced mutations that allowed growth
on cellobiose, here, we characterize the adaptation-induced mutations that help
in enhancing cellobiose metabolic ability. This study will shed new light on the 
regulatory changes and factors that are needed for the functional coupling of the
host physiology to the activated cryptic cellobiose metabolism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131928 
PMCID: PMC4488073
PMID: 26121029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((yeiE) AND (yeiE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 16;46(20):10682-10696. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky752.

Systematic discovery of uncharacterized transcription factors in Escherichia coli
K-12 MG1655.

Gao Y(1)(2), Yurkovich JT(2)(3), Seo SW(4), Kabimoldayev I(5), Dräger A(6)(7),
Chen K(2), Sastry AV(2), Fang X(2), Mih N(2)(3), Yang L(2), Eichner J(6), Cho
BK(8)(9), Kim D(5)(10)(11), Palsson BO(2)(3)(8)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Genetic Engineering and Graduate School of Biotechnology,
College of Life Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea.
(6)Computational Systems Biology of Infection and Antimicrobial-Resistant
Pathogens, Center for Bioinformatics Tübingen (ZBIT), 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany.
(8)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, 2800 Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.
(10)School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(11)School of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and
Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Transcriptional regulation enables cells to respond to environmental changes. Of 
the estimated 304 candidate transcription factors (TFs) in Escherichia coli K-12 
MG1655, 185 have been experimentally identified, but ChIP methods have been used 
to fully characterize only a few dozen. Identifying these remaining TFs is key to
improving our knowledge of the E. coli transcriptional regulatory network (TRN). 
Here, we developed an integrated workflow for the computational prediction and
comprehensive experimental validation of TFs using a suite of genome-wide
experiments. We applied this workflow to (i) identify 16 candidate TFs from over 
a hundred uncharacterized genes; (ii) capture a total of 255 DNA binding peaks
for ten candidate TFs resulting in six high-confidence binding motifs; (iii)
reconstruct the regulons of these ten TFs by determining gene expression changes 
upon deletion of each TF and (iv) identify the regulatory roles of three TFs
(YiaJ, YdcI, and YeiE) as regulators of l-ascorbate utilization, proton transfer 
and acetate metabolism, and iron homeostasis under iron-limited conditions,
respectively. Together, these results demonstrate how this workflow can be used
to discover, characterize, and elucidate regulatory functions of uncharacterized 
TFs in parallel.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky752 
PMCID: PMC6237786
PMID: 30137486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2002 Sep;66(9):1981-4.

Increase in the rate of L-pipecolic acid production using lat-expressing
Escherichia coli by lysP and yeiE amplification.

Fujii T(1), Aritoku Y, Agematu H, Tsunekawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Bioresource Laboratories, Mercian Corp,Fujisawa, Japan. fujii-td@mercian.co.jp

Biotransformation of L-lysine (L-Lys) to L-pipecolic acid (L-PA) using
lat-expressing Escherichia coli has been reported (Fujii et al., Biosci.
Biotechnol. Biochem., 66, 622-627 (2002)). The rate-limiting step of this
biotransformation seemes to be the transport of L-Lys into cells. To improve the 
L-PA production rate, we attempted to increase the rate of L-Lys uptake. E. coli 
BL21 carrying a plasmid with lat and lysP (pRH125) caused a 5-fold increase in
the rate of L-PA production above the level of cells carrying a plasmid with lat 
(pRH124). Moreover, E. coli BL21 carrying a plasmid with lat, lysP, and yeiE
(pRH127) caused a 6.4-fold increase in the rate of L-PA production above the
level of cells carrying pRH124. Our results from RT-PCR experiments and the
sequence similarity of YeiE to LysR transcriptional regulators suggest the
possibility that yeiE expression induces lysP expression. The amplification of
lysP, or rather both lysP and yeiE, increases the rate of L-PA production using
lat-expressing E. coli.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.66.1981 
PMID: 12400704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Immun. 2000 Dec;68(12):6857-64.

Sequence analysis of TnphoA insertion sites in Vibrio cholerae mutants defective 
in rugose polysaccharide production.

Ali A(1), Mahmud ZH, Morris JG Jr, Sozhamannan S, Johnson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Vibrio cholerae can switch from a smooth to a wrinkled or rugose colony phenotype
characterized by the secretion of a polysaccharide that enables the bacteria to
survive harsh environmental conditions. In order to understand the genetic basis 
of rugosity, we isolated TnphoA-induced stable, smooth mutants of two O1 El Tor
rugose strains and mapped the insertion sites in several of the mutants using a
modified Y-adapter PCR technique. One of the TnphoA insertions was mapped to the 
first gene of the vps region that was previously shown to encode the rugose
polysaccharide biosynthesis cluster. Three insertions were mapped to a previously
unknown hlyA-like gene, also in the vps region. Five other insertions were found 
in loci unlinked to the vps region: (i) in the epsD gene (encodes the "secretin" 
of the extracellular protein secretion apparatus), (ii) in a hydG-like gene
(encodes a sigma(54)-dependent transcriptional activator similar to HydG involved
in labile hydrogenase production in Escherichia coli, (iii) in a gene encoding
malic acid transport protein upstream of a gene similar to yeiE of E. coli
(encodes a protein with similarities to LysR-type transcriptional activators),
(iv) in dxr (encodes 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase), and (v) in
the intergenic region of lpd and odp (encode enzymes involved in the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex formation). These data suggest the involvement of a complex
regulatory network in rugose polysaccharide production and highlight the general 
utility of the Y-adapter PCR technique described here for rapid mapping of
transposon insertion sites.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.68.12.6857-6864.2000 
PMCID: PMC97790
PMID: 11083805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((yfgD) AND (yfgD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiol Res. 2009;164(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2008.08.006. Epub 2008 Oct 
23.

Sleeping beauty mutase (sbm) is expressed and interacts with ygfd in Escherichia 
coli.

Froese DS(1), Dobson CM, White AP, Wu X, Padovani D, Banerjee R, Haller T, Gerlt 
JA, Surette MG, Gravel RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 3330 
Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1. sfroese@ucalgary.ca

In Escherichia coli, a four-gene operon, sbm-ygfD-ygfG-ygfH, has been shown to
encode a putative cobalamin-dependent pathway with the ability to produce
propionate from succinate in vitro [Haller T, Buckel T, Retey J, Gerlt JA.
Discovering new enzymes and metabolic pathways: conversion of succinate to
propionate by Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 2000;39:4622-4629]. However, the
operon was thought to be silent in vivo, illustrated by the eponym describing its
first gene, "sleeping beauty mutase" (methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, MCM). Of the four
genes described, only ygfD could not be assigned a function. In this study, we
have evaluated the functional integrity of YgfD and Sbm and show that, indeed,
both proteins are expressed in E. coli and that YgfD has GTPase activity. We show
that YgfD and Sbm can be co-immunoprecipitated from E. coli extracts using
antibody to either protein, demonstrating in vivo interaction, a result confirmed
using a strain deleted for ygfD. We show further that, in vitro, purified
His-tagged YgfD and Sbm behave as a monomer and dimer, respectively, and that
they form a multi-subunit complex that is dependent on pre-incubation of YgfD
with non-hydrolysable GTP, an outcome that was not affected by the state of Sbm, 
as holo- or apoenzyme. These studies reinforce a role for the in vivo interaction
of YgfD and Sbm.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2008.08.006 
PMCID: PMC2741639
PMID: 18950999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ygaV) AND (ygaV)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2017 Sep 18;257:49-57. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.06.002. Epub 2017 Jun 21.

Global transcriptional response of Escherichia coli MG1655 cells exposed to the
oxygenated monoterpenes citral and carvacrol.

Chueca B(1), Pérez-Sáez E(1), Pagán R(1), García-Gonzalo D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tecnología de los Alimentos, Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de
los Alimentos, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón
(IA2), Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA, c/Miguel Servet 177, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Tecnología de los Alimentos, Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de
los Alimentos, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón
(IA2), Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA, c/Miguel Servet 177, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain. 
Electronic address: Diego.Garcia@unizar.es.

DNA microarrays were used to study the mechanism of bacterial inactivation by
carvacrol and citral. After 10-min treatments of Escherichia coli MG1655 cells
with 100 and 50ppm of carvacrol and citral, 76 and 156 genes demonstrated
significant transcriptional differences (p≤0.05), respectively. Among the
up-regulated genes after carvacrol treatment, we found gene coding for multidrug 
efflux pumps (acrA, mdtM), genes related to phage shock response (pspA, pspB,
pspC, pspD, pspF and pspG), biosynthesis of arginine (argC, argG, artJ), and
purine nucleotides (purC, purM). In citral-treated cells, transcription of purH
and pyrB and pyrI was 2 times higher. Deletion of several differentially
expressed genes confirmed the role of ygaV, yjbO, pspC, sdhA, yejG and ygaV in
the mechanisms of E. coli inactivation by carvacrol and citral. These results
would indicate that citral and carvacrol treatments cause membrane damage and
activate metabolism through the production of nucleotides required for DNA and
RNA synthesis and metabolic processes. Comparative transcriptomics of the
response of E. coli to a heat treatment, which caused a significant change of the
transcription of 1422 genes, revealed a much weaker response to both individual
constituents of essential oils (ICs).·Thus, inactivation by citral or carvacrol
was not multitarget in nature.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.06.002 
PMID: 28644990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Mar;74(6):1954-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02294-07. Epub
2008 Feb 1.

The ygaVP genes of Escherichia coli form a tributyltin-inducible operon.

Gueuné H(1), Durand MJ, Thouand G, DuBow MS.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nantes, CNRS UMR 6144, GEPEA, ERT CBAC, Département Génie
Biologique, 18 Bd. Gaston Defferre, 85035 La Roche sur Yon, France.

A tributyltin (TBT) luxAB transcriptional fusion in Escherichia coli revealed
that a TBT-activated promoter is located upstream of two cotranscribed orphan
genes, ygaV and ygaP. We demonstrate that transcription from the promoter
upstream of ygaVP is constitutive in a ygaVP mutant, suggesting that YgaV is an
autoregulated, TBT-inducible repressor.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02294-07 
PMCID: PMC2268312
PMID: 18245262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((yihW) AND (yihW)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. Microbiology (Reading). 2019 Jan;165(1):78-89. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000740. Epub
2018 Oct 29.

Regulatory role of CsqR (YihW) in transcription of the genes for catabolism of
the anionic sugar sulfoquinovose (SQ) in Escherichia coli K-12.

Shimada T(1), Yamamoto K(2)(3), Nakano M(4), Watanabe H(2), Schleheck D(5),
Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)1​Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)2​Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)3​Hosei University, Micro-Nano Technology Research Center, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.
(4)4​Kyoto University, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)5​Department of Biology and Konstanz Research School Chemical Biology,
University of Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz, Germany.

The binding sites of YihW, an uncharacterized DeoR-family transcription factor
(TF) of Escherichia coli K-12, were identified using Genomic SELEX screening at
two closely located sites, one inside the spacer between the bidirectional
transcription units comprising the yihUTS operon and the yihV gene, and another
one upstream of the yihW gene itself. Recently the YihUTS and YihV proteins were 
identified as catalysing the catabolism of sulfoquinovose (SQ), a hydrolysis
product of sulfoquinovosyl diacylglycerol (SQDG) derived from plants and other
photosynthetic organisms. Gel shift assay in vitro and reporter assay in vivo
indicated that YihW functions as a repressor for all three transcription units.
De-repression of the yih operons was found to be under the control of SQ as
inducer, but not of lactose, glucose or galactose. Furthermore, a mode of its
cooperative DNA binding was suggested for YihW by atomic force microscopy. Hence,
as a regulator of the catabolism of SQ, we renamed YihW as CsqR.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000740 
PMID: 30372406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Rep. 2018 Feb 16;8(1):3177. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21534-3.

The genes of the sulphoquinovose catabolism in Escherichia coli are also
associated with a previously unknown pathway of lactose degradation.

Kaznadzey A(1), Shelyakin P(1)(2), Belousova E(3), Eremina A(4), Shvyreva U(5),
Bykova D(3), Emelianenko V(3), Korosteleva A(6), Tutukina M(7)(8), Gelfand
MS(1)(3)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)A. A. Kharkevich Institute for Information Transmission Problems, RAS, Bolshoy
Karetny per. 19, Moscow, 127051, Russia.
(2)N. I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, RAS, ul. Gubkina 3, Moscow,
119991, Russia.
(3)M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Vorobievy Gory 1-73, Moscow, 119991, 
Russia.
(4)The University of Edinburgh, Alexander Crum Brown Rd, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH9
3FF, UK.
(5)Institute of Cell Biophysics, RAS, Institutskaya 3, Pushchino, 142290, Russia.
(6)Novosibirsk State University, ul. Pirogova 2, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.
(7)Institute of Cell Biophysics, RAS, Institutskaya 3, Pushchino, 142290, Russia.
m.tutukina@skoltech.ru.
(8)Center for Data-Intensive Biomedicine and Biotechnology, Skolkovo Institute of
Science and Technology, Moscow, 143028, Russia. m.tutukina@skoltech.ru.
(9)Center for Data-Intensive Biomedicine and Biotechnology, Skolkovo Institute of
Science and Technology, Moscow, 143028, Russia.
(10)Faculty of Computer Science, Higher School of Economics, Kochnovsky pr. 3,
Moscow, 125319, Russia.

Comparative genomics analysis of conserved gene cassettes demonstrated
resemblance between a recently described cassette of genes involved in
sulphoquinovose degradation in Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 and a Bacilli
cassette linked with lactose degradation. Six genes from both cassettes had
similar functions related to carbohydrate metabolism, namely, hydrolase,
aldolase, kinase, isomerase, transporter, and transcription factor. The
Escherichia coli sulphoglycolysis cassette was thus predicted to be associated
with lactose degradation. This prediction was confirmed experimentally:
expression of genes coding for aldolase (yihT), isomerase (yihS), and kinase
(yihV) was dramatically increased during growth on lactose. These genes were
previously shown to be activated during growth on sulphoquinovose, so our
observation may indicate multi-functional capabilities of the respective
proteins. Transcription starts for yihT, yihV and yihW were mapped in silico, in 
vitro and in vivo. Out of three promoters for yihT, one was active only during
growth on lactose. We further showed that switches in yihT transcription are
controlled by YihW, a DeoR-family transcription factor in the Escherichia coli
cassette. YihW acted as a carbon source-dependent dual regulator involved in
sustaining the baseline growth in the absence of lac-operon, with function either
complementary, or opposite to a global regulator of carbohydrate metabolism,
cAMP-CRP.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-21534-3 
PMCID: PMC5816610
PMID: 29453395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Chemosphere. 2017 May;174:136-147. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.01.132. Epub
2017 Jan 27.

Biosorption behavior and proteomic analysis of Escherichia coli P4 under cadmium 
stress.

Khan Z(1), Rehman A(2), Nisar MA(3), Zafar S(4), Zerr I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan. Electronic address: rehman_mmg@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Government College University Faisalabad (GCUF),
Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Clinical Dementia Center and DZNE, Georg-August
University, University Medical Center Goettingen (UMG), Robert-Koch-Str. 40,
37075, Goettingen, Germany.

Bacteria develop a variety of adaptations at transcriptomic, metabolomic and
proteomic levels in order to survive potentially damaging environmental
perturbations. Present study is exploring the fluctuations in proteome of E. coli
P4 to knob Cd+2-induced cytotoxicity. An attempt was also made to integrate all
these approaches to gain comprehensive insight of Cd+2 stress response in E. coli
P4. This study is exposing the altered behavior of various proteins and their
underlying metabolic pathways which have previously not been reported with
reference to Cd+2 stress such as sulfoquinovose biosynthesis and degradation
pathway. Some of the responses studied on all integrated levels followed same
dynamics and strategies to conserve energy by down regulating carbohydrate
metabolism (depicted by the repression of succinyl-CoA ligase) and growth stasis 
(down regulation of ftsZ). Moreover, proteomic analysis clearly revealed the
affection of Cd+2 stress on various proteins expression including Rrf, MdaB,
DapA, GpmA,Cdd, FabI, DsbA, ZnuA and YihW found modulating key cellular metabolic
pathways enabling E. coli P4 to withstand Cd+2-induced toxic effects.
Furthermore, over-expression of Mn-SOD provided evidence that Cd+2exposure
induces superoxide free radicals mediated oxidative stress rather than hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2). EnvZ/OmpR -a two component cell envelope regulatory system was
observed operating to homeostat the cell's internal environment. Cd+2
bioremediation potential of E. coli P4 and its kinetic and thermodynamic basis
were studied by applying different isotherm models which nominated E. coli P4 a
good bioresource for green chemistry to eradicate environmental Cd+2.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.01.132 
PMID: 28161514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((yneJ) AND (yneJ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############



1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 8;6(7):e1001017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001017.

A forward-genetic screen and dynamic analysis of lambda phage host-dependencies
reveals an extensive interaction network and a new anti-viral strategy.

Maynard ND(1), Birch EW, Sanghvi JC, Chen L, Gutschow MV, Covert MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California,
United States of America.

Latently infecting viruses are an important class of virus that plays a key role 
in viral evolution and human health. Here we report a genome-scale
forward-genetics screen for host-dependencies of the latently-infecting
bacteriophage lambda. This screen identified 57 Escherichia coli (E. coli)
genes--over half of which have not been previously associated with
infection--that when knocked out inhibited lambda phage's ability to replicate.
Our results demonstrate a highly integrated network between lambda and its host, 
in striking contrast to the results from a similar screen using the lytic-only
infecting T7 virus. We then measured the growth of E. coli under normal and
infected conditions, using wild-type and knockout strains deficient in one of the
identified host genes, and found that genes from the same pathway often exhibited
similar growth dynamics. This observation, combined with further computational
and experimental analysis, led us to identify a previously unannotated gene,
yneJ, as a novel regulator of lamB gene expression. A surprising result of this
work was the identification of two highly conserved pathways involved in tRNA
thiolation-one pathway is required for efficient lambda replication, while the
other has anti-viral properties inhibiting lambda replication. Based on our data,
it appears that 2-thiouridine modification of tRNAGlu, tRNAGln, and tRNALys is
particularly important for the efficient production of infectious lambda phage
particles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001017 
PMCID: PMC2900299
PMID: 20628568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


