

############# ((araC) AND (galK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Gene. 1998 Jul 17;215(1):19-27.

The mannitol utilization genes of Pseudomonas fluorescens are regulated by an
activator: cloning, nucleotide sequence and expression of the mtlR gene.

Brünker P(1), Hils M, Altenbuchner J, Mattes R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Industrielle Genetik, Universität Stuttgart, Allmandring 31,
70569, Stuttgart, Germany.

A plasmid with the galK gene under control of the promoter of the mannitol
utilization genes (mtl) from Pseudomonas fluorescens DSM 50106 was constructed to
isolate the mtl regulatory gene. An Escherichia coli galK- mtl- strain with this 
plasmid was used to screen a genomic library of P. fluorescens for the presence
of the regulatory gene by plating on McConkey agar plates supplemented with
galactose and mannitol. Clones carrying the regulatory gene were isolated and by 
complemention assays, deletion analysis and DNA sequencing an open reading frame 
(mtlR) of 906nt identified encoding the regulator. The deduced protein MtlR with 
a calculated molecular mass of 34.7kDa showed a low overall similarity to several
other regulatory proteins of the XylS/AraC family. When mtlR was cloned and
expressed in E. coli, the protein was produced as inclusion bodies. Complete
denaturation followed by subsequent slow refolding led to low amounts of active
protein. The activity was shown in gel mobility shift assays by binding of MtlR
to a DNA fragment containing the promoter/operator region of the P. fluorescens
mtl genes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(98)00274-1 
PMID: 9666063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1992 Nov;174(21):6862-71.

Sequence elements in the Escherichia coli araFGH promoter.

Hendrickson W(1), Flaherty C, Molz L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago 60680.

The Escherichia coli araFGH operon codes for proteins involved in the L-arabinose
high-affinity transport system. Transcriptional regulation of the operon was
studied by creating point mutations and deletions in the control region cloned
into a GalK expression vector. The transcription start site was confirmed by RNA 
sequencing of transcripts. The sequences essential for polymerase function were
localized by deletions and point mutations. Surprisingly, only a weak -10
consensus sequence, and no -35 sequence is required. Mutation of a guanosine at
position -12 greatly reduced promoter activity, which suggests important
polymerase interactions with DNA between the usual -10 and -35 positions. A
double mutation toward the consensus in the -10 region was required to create a
promoter capable of significant AraC-independent transcription. These results
show that the araFGH promoter structure is similar to that of the galP1 promoter 
and is substantially different from that of the araBAD promoter. The effects of
11 mutations within the DNA region thought to bind the cyclic AMP receptor
protein correlate well with the CRP consensus binding sequence and confirm that
this region is responsible for cyclic AMP regulation. Deletion of the AraC
binding site nearest the promoter, araFG1, eliminates arabinose regulation,
whereas deletion of the upstream AraC binding site, araFG2, has only a slight
effect on promoter activity.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.21.6862-6871.1992 
PMCID: PMC207364
PMID: 1400237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((araC) AND (galT)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jul;182(13):3794-801.

Defining a rob regulon in Escherichia coli by using transposon mutagenesis.

Bennik MH(1), Pomposiello PJ, Thorne DF, Demple B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cell Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. m.h.j.bennik@ato.wag-ur.nl

The Rob protein of Escherichia coli is a member of the AraC-XylS family of
prokaryotic transcriptional regulators and is expressed constitutively. Deletion 
of the rob gene increases susceptibility to organic solvents, while
overexpression of Rob increases tolerance to organic solvents and resistance to a
variety of antibiotics and to the superoxide-generating compound phenazine
methosulfate. To determine whether constitutive levels of Rob regulate basal gene
expression, we performed a MudJ transposon screen in a rob deletion mutant
containing a plasmid that allows for controlled rob gene expression. We
identified eight genes and confirmed that seven are transcriptionally activated
by normal expression of Rob from the chromosomal rob gene (inaA, marR, aslB,
ybaO, mdlA, yfhD, and ybiS). One gene, galT, was repressed by Rob. We also
demonstrated by Northern analysis that basal expression of micF is significantly 
higher in wild-type E. coli than in a rob deletion mutant. Rob binding to the
promoter regions of most of these genes was substantiated in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. However, Mu insertions in individual Rob-regulated genes
did not affect solvent sensitivity. This phenotype may depend on changes in the
expression of several of these Rob-regulated genes or on other genes that were
not identified. Rob clearly affects the basal expression of genes with a broad
range of functions, including antibiotic resistance, acid adaptation, carbon
metabolism, cell wall synthesis, central intermediary metabolism, and transport. 
The magnitudes of Rob's effects are modest, however, and the protein may thus
play a role as a general transcription cofactor.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.13.3794-3801.2000 
PMCID: PMC94552
PMID: 10850996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((araC) AND (dkgA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Mar;38(3):431-9. doi: 10.1007/s10295-010-0787-5.
Epub 2010 Jul 30.

YqhC regulates transcription of the adjacent Escherichia coli genes yqhD and dkgA
that are involved in furfural tolerance.

Turner PC(1), Miller EN, Jarboe LR, Baggett CL, Shanmugam KT, Ingram LO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Box
110700, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Previous results have demonstrated that the silencing of adjacent genes encoding 
NADPH-dependent furfural oxidoreductases (yqhD dkgA) is responsible for increased
furfural tolerance in an E. coli strain EMFR9 [Miller et al., Appl Environ
Microbiol 75:4315-4323, 2009]. This gene silencing is now reported to result from
the spontaneous insertion of an IS10 into the coding region of yqhC, an upstream 
gene. YqhC shares homology with transcriptional regulators belonging to the
AraC/XylS family and was shown to act as a positive regulator of the adjacent
operon encoding YqhD and DkgA. Regulation was demonstrated by constructing a
chromosomal deletion of yqhC, a firefly luciferase reporter plasmid for yqhC, and
by a direct comparison of furfural resistance and NADPH-dependent furfural
reductase activity. Closely related bacteria contain yqhC, yqhD, and dkgA
orthologs in the same arrangement as in E. coli LY180. Orthologs of yqhC are also
present in more distantly related Gram-negative bacteria. Disruption of yqhC
offers a useful approach to increase furfural tolerance in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-010-0787-5 
PMID: 20676725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((pdhR) AND (lipA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Res Microbiol. 2014 Jul-Aug;165(6):429-38. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2014.04.005.
Epub 2014 May 9.

PdhR, the pyruvate dehydrogenase repressor, does not regulate lipoic acid
synthesis.

Feng Y(1), Cronan JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases & State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Disease, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, PR China; Department of Medical Microbiology and
Parasitology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, 
PR China; Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
IL 61801, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL
61801, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address: j-cronan@life.uiuc.edu.

Lipoic acid is a covalently-bound enzyme cofactor required for central metabolism
all three domains of life. In the last 20 years the pathway of lipoic acid
synthesis and metabolism has been established in Escherichia coli. Expression of 
the genes of the lipoic acid biosynthesis pathway was believed to be
constitutive. However, in 2010 Kaleta and coworkers (BMC Syst. Biol. 4:116)
predicted a binding site for the pyruvate dehydrogenase operon repressor, PdhR
(referred to lipA site 1) upstream of lipA, the gene encoding lipoic acid
synthase and concluded that PdhR regulates lipA transcription. We report in vivo 
and in vitro evidence that lipA is not controlled by PdhR and that the putative
regulatory site deduced by the prior workers is nonfunctional and physiologically
irrelevant. E. coli PdhR was purified to homogeneity and used for electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. The lipA site 1 of Kaleta and coworkers failed to bind
PdhR. The binding detected by these workers is due to another site (lipA site 3) 
located far upstream of the lipA promoter. Relative to the canonical PdhR binding
site lipA site 3 is a half-palindrome and as expected had only weak PdhR binding 
ability. Manipulation of lipA site 3 to construct a palindrome gave significantly
enhanced PdhR binding affinity. The native lipA promoter and the version carrying
the artificial lipA3 palindrome were transcriptionally fused to a LacZ reporter
gene to directly assay lipA expression. Deletion of pdhR gave no significant
change in lipA promoter-driven β-galactosidase activity with either the native or
constructed palindrome upstream sequences, indicating that PdhR plays no
physiological role in regulation of lipA expression.

Copyright © 2014 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2014.04.005 
PMCID: PMC4134263
PMID: 24816490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Aug 18;4:116. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116.

Integrative inference of gene-regulatory networks in Escherichia coli using
information theoretic concepts and sequence analysis.

Kaleta C(1), Göhler A, Schuster S, Jahreis K, Guthke R, Nikolajewa S.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology/Bioinformatics Group, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Beutenbergstr, 11a,
D-07745 Jena, Germany. christoph.kaleta@uni-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Although Escherichia coli is one of the best studied model organisms,
a comprehensive understanding of its gene regulation is not yet achieved. There
exist many approaches to reconstruct regulatory interaction networks from gene
expression experiments. Mutual information based approaches are most useful for
large-scale network inference.
RESULTS: We used a three-step approach in which we combined gene regulatory
network inference based on directed information (DTI) and sequence analysis. DTI 
values were calculated on a set of gene expression profiles from 19 time course
experiments extracted from the Many Microbes Microarray Database. Focusing on
influences between pairs of genes in which one partner encodes a transcription
factor (TF) we derived a network which contains 878 TF - gene interactions of
which 166 are known according to RegulonDB. Afterward, we selected a subset of
109 interactions that could be confirmed by the presence of a phylogenetically
conserved binding site of the respective regulator. By this second step, the
fraction of known interactions increased from 19% to 60%. In the last step, we
checked the 44 of the 109 interactions not yet included in RegulonDB for
functional relationships between the regulator and the target and, thus, obtained
ten TF - target gene interactions. Five of them concern the regulator LexA and
have already been reported in the literature. The remaining five influences
describe regulations by Fis (with two novel targets), PhdR, PhoP, and KdgR. For
the validation of our approach, one of them, the regulation of lipoate synthase
(LipA) by the pyruvate-sensing pyruvate dehydrogenate repressor (PdhR), was
experimentally checked and confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: We predicted a set of five novel TF - target gene interactions in E.
coli. One of them, the regulation of lipA by the transcriptional regulator PdhR
was validated experimentally. Furthermore, we developed DTInfer, a new R-package 
for the inference of gene-regulatory networks from microarrays using directed
information.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116 
PMCID: PMC2936295
PMID: 20718955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degP) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Reversal of the ΔdegP phenotypes by a novel rpoE allele of Escherichia coli.

Leiser OP(1), Charlson ES, Gerken H, Misra R.

Author information: 
(1)The Microbial Genetics and Genomics Center, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, United States of America.

RseA sequesters RpoE (σ(E)) to the inner membrane of Escherichia coli when
envelope stress is low. Elevated envelope stress triggers RseA cleavage by the
sequential action of two membrane proteases, DegS and RseP, releasing σ(E) to
activate an envelope stress reducing pathway. Revertants of a ΔdegP ΔbamB strain,
which fails to grow at 37°C due to high envelope stress, harbored mutations in
the rseA and rpoE genes. Null and missense rseA mutations constitutively
hyper-activated the σ(E) regulon and significantly reduced the major outer
membrane protein (OMP) levels. In contrast, a novel rpoE allele, rpoE3, resulting
from the partial duplication of the rpoE gene, increased σ(E) levels greater than
that seen in the rseA mutant background but did not reduce OMP levels. A
σ(E)-dependent RybB::LacZ construct showed only a weak activation of the σ(E)
pathway by rpoE3. Despite this, rpoE3 fully reversed the growth and envelope
vesiculation phenotypes of ΔdegP. Interestingly, rpoE3 also brought down the
modestly activated Cpx envelope stress pathway in the ΔdegP strain to the wild
type level, showing the complementary nature of the σ(E) and Cpx pathways.
Through employing a labile mutant periplasmic protein, AcrA(L222Q), it was
determined that the rpoE3 mutation overcomes the ΔdegP phenotypes, in part, by
activating a σ(E)-dependent proteolytic pathway. Our data suggest that a
reduction in the OMP levels is not intrinsic to the σ(E)-mediated mechanism of
lowering envelope stress. They also suggest that under extreme envelope stress, a
tight homeostasis loop between RseA and σ(E) may partly be responsible for cell
death, and this loop can be broken by mutations that either lower RseA activity
or increase σ(E) levels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979 
PMCID: PMC3306311
PMID: 22439016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Genet Syst. 2009 Feb;84(1):15-24.

Suppression by enhanced RpoE activity of the temperature-sensitive phenotype of a
degP ssrA double mutant in Escherichia coli.

Ono K(1), Kutsukake K, Abo T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

SsrA is a small RNA playing a crucial role in trans-translation, which leads to
rescue of stalled ribosomes on or at the end of mRNA and addition of the
degradation tag to a growing polypeptide. The lack of SsrA has been shown to
enhance the temperature-sensitive (ts) phenotype of an E. coli strain defective
in the degP gene, which encodes one of the periplasmic proteases. This severe ts 
phenotype was relieved only partially by an SsrADD variant, which can lead to
ribosome rescue but adds a protease-resistant tag instead of the degradation tag,
suggesting that accumulation of polypeptides programmed by truncated mRNAs is
responsible for growth defect of the ssrA degP mutant. Expression of an
S210A-mutant DegP protein, which lacks the protease activity but retains the
chaperone activity, could relieve the ts phenotype of the double mutant,
suggesting that the chaperone activity but not the protease activity of DegP is
required for growth of the ssrA-deficient cells at high temperature.
Overexpression of the rpoE gene, which encodes sigmaE responsible for the
expression of factors involved in extracellular stress response, also suppressed 
the ts phenotype of the ssrA degP mutant. This suggests that the
stress-responsing pathway(s) may be involved in the enhancement of ts phenotype
of degP mutant in the absence of SsrA.

DOI: 10.1266/ggs.84.15 
PMID: 19420797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Oct;1758(10):1587-95. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

Verapamil, a Ca2+ channel inhibitor acts as a local anesthetic and induces the
sigma E dependent extra-cytoplasmic stress response in E. coli.

Andersen CL(1), Holland IB, Jacq A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Microbiologie, UMR 8621, Université Paris-Sud (XI),
Bâtiment 400, 91405 Orsay cedex, France.

Verapamil is used clinically as a Ca(2+) channel inhibitor for the treatment of
various disorders such as angina, hypertension and cardiac arrhythmia. Here we
study the effect of verapamil on the bacterium Escherichia coli. The drug was
shown to inhibit cell division at growth sub inhibitory concentrations,
independently of the SOS response. We show verapamil is a membrane active drug,
with similar effects to dibucaine, a local anesthetic. Thus, both verapamil and
dibucaine abolish the proton motive force and decrease the intracellular ATP
concentration. This is accompanied by induction of degP expression, as a result
of the activation of the RpoE (SigmaE) extra-cytoplasmic stress response, and
activation of the psp operon. Such effects of verapamil, as a membrane active
compound, could explain its general toxicity in eukaryotic cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.05.022 
PMID: 16836975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2005 May;187(10):3359-68.

Defective O-antigen polymerization in tolA and pal mutants of Escherichia coli in
response to extracytoplasmic stress.

Vinés ED(1), Marolda CL, Balachandran A, Valvano MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

We have previously shown that the TolA protein is required for the correct
surface expression of the Escherichia coli O7 antigen lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
In this work, delta tolA and delta pal mutants of E. coli K-12 W3110 were
transformed with pMF19 (encoding a rhamnosyltransferase that reconstitutes the
expression of O16-specific LPS), pWQ5 (encoding the Klebsiella pneumoniae O1 LPS 
gene cluster), or pWQ802 (encoding the genes necessary for the synthesis of
Salmonella enterica O:54). Both DeltatolA and delta pal mutants exhibited reduced
surface expression of O16 LPS as compared to parental W3110, but no significant
differences were observed in the expression of K. pneumoniae O1 LPS and S.
enterica O:54 LPS. Therefore, TolA and Pal are required for the correct surface
expression of O antigens that are assembled in a wzy (polymerase)-dependent
manner (like those of E. coli O7 and O16) but not for O antigens assembled by
wzy-independent pathways (like K. pneumoniae O1 and S. enterica O:54).
Furthermore, we show that the reduced surface expression of O16 LPS in delta tolA
and delta pal mutants was associated with a partial defect in O-antigen
polymerization and it was corrected by complementation with intact tolA and pal
genes, respectively. Using derivatives of W3110 delta tolA and W3110 delta pal
containing lacZ reporter fusions to fkpA and degP, we also demonstrate that the
RpoE-mediated extracytoplasmic stress response is upregulated in these mutants.
Moreover, an altered O16 polymerization was also detected under conditions that
stimulate RpoE-mediated extracytoplasmic stress responses in tol+ and pal+
genetic backgrounds. A Wzy derivative with an epitope tag at the C-terminal end
of the protein was stable in all the mutants, ruling out stress-mediated
proteolysis of Wzy. We conclude that the absence of TolA and Pal elicits a
sustained extracytoplasmic stress response that in turn reduces O-antigen
polymerization but does not affect the stability of the Wzy O-antigen polymerase.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.10.3359-3368.2005 
PMCID: PMC1112028
PMID: 15866920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Feb 16;231(2):227-35.

Regulation of htrA expression in Yersinia enterocolitica.

Heusipp G(1), Nelson KM, Schmidt MA, Miller VL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung,
Universitätsklinikum Münster, von-Esmarch-Strasse 56, 48149 Münster, Germany.
heusipp@uni-muenster.de

In Escherichia coli, envelope stress is regulated by the alternative sigma factor
sigma(E) and the two-component regulatory system CpxRA. Both systems overlap in
the transcriptional regulation of the htrA gene encoding a protease that degrades
misfolded proteins in the periplasm. In Yersinia enterocolitica, HtrA is
important for intracellular survival and full virulence in animal models. Here we
show that regulation of htrA expression in Y. enterocolitica is dependent on CpxR
and putatively also on RpoE. However, the stimuli inducing both systems were
different from E. coli. Most strikingly, we found that overproduction of an outer
membrane protein, a typical stimulus for the induction of htrA expression via
RpoE in E. coli, led to the induction of htrA expression via the Cpx system in Y.
enterocolitica. Interestingly, a Y. enterocolitica CpxR mutant strain was not
impaired for virulence in a mouse model of infection.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00962-5 
PMID: 14987769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Oct;26(2):209-21.

The HtrA family of serine proteases.

Pallen MJ(1), Wren BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, St Bartholomew's and the Royal London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, UK. m.pallen@qmw.ac.uk

HtrA, also known as DegP and probably identical to the Do protease, is a heat
shock-induced serine protease that is active in the periplasm of Escherichia
coli. Homologues of HtrA have been described in a wide range of bacteria and in
eukaryotes. Its chief role is to degrade misfolded proteins in the periplasm.
Substrate recognition probably involves the recently described PDZ domains in the
C-terminal half of HtrA and, we suspect, has much in common with the substrate
recognition system of the tail-specific protease, Prc (which also possesses a PDZ
domain). The expression of htrA is regulated by a complex set of signal
transduction pathways, which includes an alternative sigma factor, RpoE, an
anti-sigma factor, RseA, a two-component regulatory system, CpxRA, and two
phosphoprotein phosphatases, PrpA and PrpB. Mutations in the htrA genes of
Salmonella, Brucella and Yersinia cause decreased survival in mice and/or
macrophages, and htrA mutants can act as vaccines, as cloning hosts and as
carriers of heterologous antigens.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.5601928.x 
PMID: 9383148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 1995 May;177(10):2918-22.

The rpoE gene of Escherichia coli, which encodes sigma E, is essential for
bacterial growth at high temperature.

Hiratsu K(1), Amemura M, Nashimoto H, Shinagawa H, Makino K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Osaka University, Japan.

In vitro transcription analysis has shown that only RNA polymerase containing an 
alternative sigma subunit, sigma E, activates transcription from one of the rpoH 
promoters and the htrA promoter. The location of the rpoE gene encoding sigma E
on the Escherichia coli chromosome has recently been established, but no rpoE
mutant has yet become available for phenotypic testing. We cloned the rpoE gene
from the lambda-ordered clones of the E. coli genome and confirmed that the
reconstituted RNA polymerase containing the gene product (E sigma E) can
transcribe htrA in vitro. We constructed an rpoE-defective strain by gene
disruption using the cloned rpoE gene. We demonstrate that expression of htrA is 
completely dependent on the rpoE gene in vivo and that the rpoE gene is essential
for bacterial growth at high temperature.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.10.2918-2922.1995 
PMCID: PMC176969
PMID: 7751307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 1;14(5):1043-55.

The rpoE gene encoding the sigma E (sigma 24) heat shock sigma factor of
Escherichia coli.

Raina S(1), Missiakas D, Georgopoulos C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie Médicale, Centre Médical Universitaire, Genève,
Switzerland.

Previous work has established that the transcription factor sigma E (sigma 24) is
necessary for maintaining the induction of the heat shock response of Escherichia
coli at high temperatures. We have identified the gene encoding sigma E using a
genetic screen designed to isolate trans-acting mutations that abolish expression
from either htrA or rpoHP3, two promoters recognized uniquely by sigma
E-containing RNA polymerase. Such a screen was achieved by transducing strains
carrying a single copy of either phtrA-lacZ or rpoHP3-lacZ fusions with
mutagenized bacteriophage P1 lysates and screening for Lac- mutant colonies at 22
degrees C. Lac- mutants were subsequently tested for inability to grow at 43
degrees C (Ts- phenotype). Only those Lac- Ts- mutants that were unable to
accumulate heat shock proteins at 50 degrees C were retained for further
characterization. In a complementary approach, those genes which when cloned on a
multicopy plasmid led to higher constitutive expression of the sigma E regulon
were characterized and mapped. Both approaches identified the same gene, rpoE,
mapping at 55.5 min on the E.coli genetic map and encoding a polypeptide of 191
amino acid residues. The wild-type and a mutant rpoE gene products were
over-expressed and purified. It was found that the purified wild-type sigma E
protein, when used in in vitro run-off transcription assays in combination with
core RNA polymerase, was able to direct transcription from the htrA and rpoHP3
promoters, but not from known sigma 70-dependent promoters. In vivo and in vitro 
analyses of rpoE transcriptional regulation showed that the rpoE gene is
transcribed from two major promoters, one of which is positively regulated by
sigma E itself.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07085.x 
PMCID: PMC398177
PMID: 7889935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (frmA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 9;6:38879. doi: 10.1038/srep38879.

The mechanism of a formaldehyde-sensing transcriptional regulator.

Denby KJ(1), Iwig J(2), Bisson C(1), Westwood J(1), Rolfe MD(1), Sedelnikova
SE(1), Higgins K(3), Maroney MJ(3), Baker PJ(1), Chivers PT(2)(4), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University
School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, Amherst, MA
01003, USA.
(4)Departments of Biosciences and Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, 
UK.

Most organisms are exposed to the genotoxic chemical formaldehyde, either from
endogenous or environmental sources. Therefore, biology has evolved systems to
perceive and detoxify formaldehyde. The frmRA(B) operon that is present in many
bacteria represents one such system. The FrmR protein is a transcriptional
repressor that is specifically inactivated in the presence of formaldehyde,
permitting expression of the formaldehyde detoxification machinery (FrmA and
FrmB, when the latter is present). The X-ray structure of the
formaldehyde-treated Escherichia coli FrmR (EcFrmR) protein reveals the formation
of methylene bridges that link adjacent Pro2 and Cys35 residues in the EcFrmR
tetramer. Methylene bridge formation has profound effects on the pattern of
surface charge of EcFrmR and combined with biochemical/biophysical data suggests 
a mechanistic model for formaldehyde-sensing and derepression of frmRA(B)
expression in numerous bacterial species.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38879 
PMCID: PMC5146963
PMID: 27934966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6714-20.

Global transcriptional effects of a suppressor tRNA and the inactivation of the
regulator frmR.

Herring CD(1), Blattner FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 445 Henry Mall,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Expression of an amber suppressor tRNA should result in read-through of the 326
open reading frames (ORFs) that terminate with amber stop codons in the
Escherichia coli genome, including six pseudogenes. Abnormal extension of an ORF 
might alter the activities of the protein and have effects on cellular
physiology, while suppression of a pseudogene could lead to a gain of function.
We used oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if any effects were apparent at 
the level of transcription in glucose minimal medium. Surprisingly, only eight
genes had significantly different expression in the presence of the suppressor.
Among these were the genes yaiN, adhC, and yaiM, forming a single putative operon
whose likely function is the degradation of formaldehyde. Expression of wild-type
yaiN was shown to result in repression of the operon, while a
suppression-mimicking allele lacking the amber stop codon and extended 7 amino
acids did not. The operon was shown to be induced by formaldehyde, and the genes 
have been renamed frmR, frmA, and frmB, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6714-6720.2004 
PMCID: PMC522192
PMID: 15466022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19806-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Generating a Metal-responsive Transcriptional Regulator to Test What Confers
Metal Sensing in Cells.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Chakrabarti B(1), Foster AW(1),
Lurie-Luke E(3), Huggins TG(2), Robinson NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Centre, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040, and.
(3)Life Sciences Open Innovation, London Innovation Centre, Procter and Gamble
Technical Centres, Ltd., Egham TW20 9NW, United Kingdom.
(4)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (a CsoR/RcnR-like
transcriptional de-repressor) is shown to repress the frmRA operator-promoter,
and repression is alleviated by formaldehyde but not manganese, iron, cobalt,
nickel, copper, or Zn(II) within cells. In contrast, repression by a mutant
FrmRE64H (which gains an RcnR metal ligand) is alleviated by cobalt and Zn(II).
Unexpectedly, FrmR was found to already bind Co(II), Zn(II), and Cu(I), and
moreover metals, as well as formaldehyde, trigger an allosteric response that
weakens DNA affinity. However, the sensory metal sites of the cells' endogenous
metal sensors (RcnR, ZntR, Zur, and CueR) are all tighter than FrmR for their
cognate metals. Furthermore, the endogenous metal sensors are shown to
out-compete FrmR. The metal-sensing FrmRE64H mutant has tighter metal affinities 
than FrmR by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Gain of cobalt sensing by
FrmRE64H remains enigmatic because the cobalt affinity of FrmRE64H is
substantially weaker than that of the endogenous cobalt sensor. Cobalt sensing
requires glutathione, which may assist cobalt access, conferring a kinetic
advantage. For Zn(II), the metal affinity of FrmRE64H approaches the metal
affinities of cognate Zn(II) sensors. Counter-intuitively, the allosteric
coupling free energy for Zn(II) is smaller in metal-sensing FrmRE64H compared
with nonsensing FrmR. By determining the copies of FrmR and FrmRE64H tetramers
per cell, then estimating promoter occupancy as a function of intracellular
Zn(II) concentration, we show how a modest tightening of Zn(II) affinity, plus
weakened DNA affinity of the apoprotein, conspires to make the relative
properties of FrmRE64H (compared with ZntR and Zur) sufficient to sense Zn(II)
inside cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427 
PMCID: PMC4528141
PMID: 26109070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((frmR) AND (rcnB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (dnaK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2008 Aug;5(4):437-47. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2008.0100.

Examination of stress and virulence gene expression in Escherichia coli O157:H7
using targeted microarray analysis.

Allen KJ(1), Lepp D, McKellar RC, Griffiths MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Canadian Research Institute for Food Safety,
University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Escherichia coli O157:H7 poses a threat to humans through food- and water-borne
transmission. To investigate how environmental stresses affect the Escherichia
coli O157:H7 transcriptome, we designed a targeted microarray consisting of
stress response and virulence genes (n = 125) to analyze the impact of acidified 
(pH 3.5), cold (7.5 degrees C), and fresh tryptic soy broth (TSB) (37 degrees C) 
on E. coli O157:H7 stress response and virulence gene expression. Nutrient
replenishment with fresh TSB resulted in 72 differentially expressed genes (> or 
= 1.5-fold change; p < 0.05), with 65 induced. All queried global and specific
stress regulators were affected, as were 12 virulence genes. Cold-shocked cells
displayed 17 differentially expressed genes, with 10 being induced. Induction of 
rpoS, members of the sigma(H) regulon (clpB, dnaK, ftsH), and acid resistance
(AR) genes (gadA, gadX) was observed. Porin transcript (ompC, ompF) and gapA and 
tufA ancillary genes were repressed. Acid shock resulted in 24 differentially
expressed genes, with 21 induced. No induction of any stationary phase AR system 
was observed, though acid-coping mechanisms were recruited, including mar and
phoB induction, and repression of ompC and ompF. Stress regulators were induced, 
including relA, soxS, rpoE, and rpoH. The microarray data were validated by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Exposure to sublethal stress
events led to the induction of diverse stress response networks. In the food
chain, sublethal events may render cells increasingly resistant to future
stresses, potentially leading to increased survival.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2008.0100 
PMID: 18713062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ahpC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Microbiol. 2017 Mar 8;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12866-017-0966-x.

Disruption of rcsB by a duplicated sequence in a curli-producing Escherichia coli
O157:H7 results in differential gene expression in relation to biofilm formation,
stress responses and metabolism.

Sharma VK(1), Bayles DO(2), Alt DP(2), Looft T(3), Brunelle BW(3), Stasko JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Food Safety and Enteric Pathogens Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, ARS-USDA, P. O. Box 70, 1920 Dayton Avenue, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
vijay.sharma@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Infectious Bacterial Diseases Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center,
ARS-USDA, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
(3)Food Safety and Enteric Pathogens Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, ARS-USDA, P. O. Box 70, 1920 Dayton Avenue, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
(4)Microscopy Services Unit, National Animal Disease Center, ARS-USDA, Ames, IA, 
50010, USA.

BACKGROUND: Escherichia coli O157:H7 (O157) strain 86-24, linked to a 1986
disease outbreak, displays curli- and biofilm-negative phenotypes that are
correlated with the lack of Congo red (CR) binding and formation of white
colonies (CR-) on a CR-containing medium. However, on a CR medium this strain
produces red isolates (CR+) capable of producing curli fimbriae and biofilms.
RESULTS: To identify genes controlling differential expression of curli fimbriae 
and biofilm formation, the RNA-Seq profile of a CR+ isolate was compared to the
CR- parental isolate. Of the 242 genes expressed differentially in the CR+
isolate, 201 genes encoded proteins of known functions while the remaining 41
encoded hypothetical proteins. Among the genes with known functions, 149 were
down- and 52 were up-regulated. Some of the upregulated genes were linked to
biofilm formation through biosynthesis of curli fimbriae and flagella. The genes 
encoding transcriptional regulators, such as CsgD, QseB, YkgK, YdeH, Bdm, CspD,
BssR and FlhDC, which modulate biofilm formation, were significantly altered in
their expression. Several genes of the envelope stress (cpxP), heat shock (rpoH, 
htpX, degP), oxidative stress (ahpC, katE), nutrient limitation stress (phoB-phoR
and pst) response pathways, and amino acid metabolism were downregulated in the
CR+ isolate. Many genes mediating acid resistance and colanic acid biosynthesis, 
which influence biofilm formation directly or indirectly, were also
down-regulated. Comparative genomics of CR+ and CR- isolates revealed the
presence of a short duplicated sequence in the rcsB gene of the CR+ isolate. The 
alignment of the amino acid sequences of RcsB of the two isolates showed
truncation of RcsB in the CR+ isolate at the insertion site of the duplicated
sequence. Complementation of CR+ isolate with rcsB of the CR- parent restored
parental phenotypes to the CR+ isolate.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that RcsB is a global regulator
affecting bacterial survival in growth-restrictive environments through
upregulation of genes promoting biofilm formation while downregulating certain
metabolic functions. Understanding whether rcsB inactivation enhances persistence
and survival of O157 in carrier animals and the environment would be important in
developing strategies for controlling this bacterial pathogen in these niches.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-017-0966-x 
PMCID: PMC5343319
PMID: 28274217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (phoP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Nov;23(11):7245-7254. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15816. Epub 
2021 Oct 19.

Escherichia coli cryptic prophages sense nutrients to influence persister cell
resuscitation.

Song S(1)(2)(3), Kim JS(4), Yamasaki R(5), Oh S(6), Benedik MJ(7), Wood TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania, 16802-4400, USA.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Jeonbuk National University, 587 Baekje-Daero,
Deokjin-Gu, Jeonju-Si, Jeollabuk-Do, 54896, South Korea.
(3)Department of Agricultural Convergence Technology, Jeonbuk National
University, 587 Baekje-Daero, Deokjin-Gu, Jeonju-Si, Jeollabuk-Do, 54896, South
Korea.
(4)Department of Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon National University, 119
Academy-ro, Incheon, 22012, South Korea.
(5)Department of Health Promotion, Kyushu Dental University, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka,
803-8580, Japan.
(6)Division of Animal Science, Chonnam National University, 77 Yongbong-Ro,
Buk-Gu, Gwangju, 61186, South Korea.
(7)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843, USA.

Cryptic prophages are not genomic junk but instead enable cells to combat myriad 
stresses as an active stress response. How these phage fossils affect persister
cell resuscitation has, however, not been explored. Persister cells form as a
result of stresses such as starvation, antibiotics and oxidative conditions, and 
resuscitation of these persister cells likely causes recurring infections such as
those associated with tuberculosis, cystic fibrosis and Lyme disease. Deletion of
each of the nine Escherichia coli cryptic prophages has no effect on persister
cell formation. Strikingly, elimination of each cryptic prophage results in an
increase in persister cell resuscitation with a dramatic increase in
resuscitation upon deleting all nine prophages. This increased resuscitation
includes eliminating the need for a carbon source and is due to activation of the
phosphate import system resulting from inactivating the transcriptional regulator
AlpA of the CP4-57 cryptic prophage. Deletion of alpA increases persister
resuscitation, and AlpA represses phosphate regulator PhoR. Both phosphate
regulators PhoP and PhoB stimulate resuscitation. This suggests a novel cellular 
stress mechanism controlled by cryptic prophages: regulation of phosphate uptake 
which controls the exit of the cell from dormancy and prevents premature
resuscitation in the absence of nutrients.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15816 
PMID: 34668292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 27;10(1):3661. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3.

Epistatic Effect of Regulators to the Adaptive Growth of Escherichia coli.

Miyake Y(1), Yamamoto K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan.
(2)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.
(3)Hosei University, Research Institute of Micro-Nano Technology, Koganei, Tokyo,
184-8584, Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.

Bacteria survive in the environment with three steps: a sensing environmental
conditions, a responding to sensed signals, and an adaptation for proper survival
in the environment. An adapting bacterial cell occurs cell division to increase
the number of sister cells, termed adaptive growth. Two-component systems (TCSs),
representing the main bacterial signal transduction systems, consist of a pair of
one sensor kinase (SK) and one response regulator (RR), and RR genes are abundant
in most bacterial genomes as part of the core genome. The OmpR gene family, a
group of RR genes, is conserved in 95% of known bacterial genomes. The
Escherichia coli genome has an estimated 34 RR genes in total, including 14 genes
of OmpR family genes. To reveal the contribution of TCSs for fast growth as an
adaptive growth strategy of E. coli, we isolated a set of gene knockout strains
by using newly developed genome editing technology, the HoSeI (Homologous
Sequence Integration) method, based on CRISPR-Cas9. The statistics of single cell
observation show a knockout of an arbitrary pair of phoP, phoB, and ompR genes,
stably expressed by positive feedback regulation, dramatically inhibit the
optimum adaptive growth of E. coli. These insights suggest that the adaptive
growth of bacteria is fulfilled by the optimum high intracellular level of
regulators acquired during growth under environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3 
PMCID: PMC7046781
PMID: 32108145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Front Microbiol. 2018 Nov 6;9:2678. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02678. eCollection
2018.

Activation of the PhoPR-Mediated Response to Phosphate Limitation Is Regulated by
Wall Teichoic Acid Metabolism in Bacillus subtilis.

Devine KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Phosphorous is essential for cell viability. To ensure an adequate supply under
phosphate limiting conditions, bacteria induce a cohort of enzymes to scavenge
for phosphate, and a high affinity transporter for its uptake into the cell. This
response is controlled by a two-component signal transduction system named PhoBR 
in Escherichia coli and PhoPR in Bacillus subtilis. PhoR is a sensor kinase whose
activity is responsive to phosphate availability. Under phosphate limiting
conditions, PhoR exists in kinase mode that phosphorylates its cognate response
regulator (PhoB, PhoP). When activated, PhoB∼P/PhoP∼P execute changes in gene
expression that adapt cells to the phosphate limited state. Under phosphate
replete conditions, PhoR exists in phosphatase mode that maintains PhoB/PhoP in
an inactive, non-phosphorylated state. The mechanism by which phosphate
availability is sensed and how it controls the balance between PhoR kinase and
phosphatase activities has been studied in E. coli and B. subtilis. Two different
mechanisms have emerged. In the most common mechanism, PhoR activity is
responsive to phosphate transport through a PstSCAB/PhoU signaling complex that
relays the conformational status of the transporter to PhoR. In the second
mechanism currently confined to B. subtilis, PhoR activity is responsive to wall 
teichoic acid metabolism whereby biosynthetic intermediates can promote or
inhibit PhoR autokinase activity. Variations of both mechanisms are found that
allow each bacterial species to adapt to phosphate availability in their
particular environmental niche.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02678 
PMCID: PMC6232261
PMID: 30459743 


4. Genes Dev. 2018 Jan 1;32(1):79-92. doi: 10.1101/gad.309245.117. Epub 2018 Feb 1.

Protein synthesis controls phosphate homeostasis.

Pontes MH(1)(2), Groisman EA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06536, USA.
(2)Yale Microbial Sciences Institute, West Haven, Connecticut 06516, USA.

Phosphorus is an essential element assimilated largely as orthophosphate (Pi).
Cells respond to Pi starvation by importing Pi from their surroundings. We now
report that impaired protein synthesis alone triggers a Pi starvation response
even when Pi is plentiful in the extracellular milieu. In the bacterium
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, this response entails phosphorylation of
the regulatory protein PhoB and transcription of PhoB-dependent Pi transporter
genes and is eliminated upon stimulation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
hydrolysis. When protein synthesis is impaired due to low cytoplasmic magnesium
(Mg2+), Salmonella triggers the Pi starvation response because ribosomes are
destabilized, which reduces ATP consumption and thus free cytoplasmic Pi. This
response is transient because low cytoplasmic Mg2+ promotes an uptake in Mg2+ and
a decrease in ATP levels, which stabilizes ribosomes, resulting in ATP
consumption and Pi increase, thus ending the response. Notably, pharmacological
inhibition of protein synthesis also elicited a Pi starvation response in the
bacterium Escherichia coli and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae Our findings
identify a regulatory connection between protein synthesis and Pi homeostasis
that is widespread in nature.

© 2018 Pontes and Groisman; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.309245.117 
PMCID: PMC5828397
PMID: 29437726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 2010 May 21;398(5):647-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.03.056. Epub 2010 
Apr 2.

A single-amino-acid substitution in the C terminus of PhoP determines DNA-binding
specificity of the virulence-associated response regulator from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Das AK(1), Pathak A, Sinha A, Datt M, Singh B, Karthikeyan S, Sarkar D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Technology (CSIR), Sector-39A, Chandigarh-160036,
India.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis PhoP-PhoR two-component system is essential for
virulence in animal models of tuberculosis. Genetic and biochemical studies
indicate that PhoP regulates the expression of more than 110 genes in M.
tuberculosis. The C-terminal effector domain of PhoP exhibits a winged
helix-turn-helix motif with the molecular surfaces around the recognition helix
(alpha 8) displaying strong positive electrostatic potential, suggesting its role
in DNA binding and nucleotide sequence recognition. Here, the relative importance
of interfacial alpha 8-DNA contacts has been tested through rational mutagenesis 
coupled with in vitro binding-affinity studies. Most PhoP mutants, each with a
potential DNA contacting residue replaced with Ala, had significantly reduced DNA
binding affinity. However, substitution of nonconserved Glu215 had a major effect
on the specificity of recognition. Although lack of specificity does not
necessarily correlate with gross change in the overall DNA binding properties of 
PhoP, structural superposition of the PhoP C-domain on the Escherichia coli PhoB 
C-domain-DNA complex suggests a base-specific interaction between Glu215 of PhoP 
and the ninth base of the DR1 repeat motif. Biochemical experiments corroborate
these results, showing that DNA recognition specificity can be altered by as
little as a single residue change of the protein or a single base change of the
DNA. The results have implications for the mechanism of sequence-specific DNA
binding by PhoP.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.03.056 
PMID: 20363229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2007 Aug;189(16):5987-95. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

Crystal structures of the receiver domain of the response regulator PhoP from
Escherichia coli in the absence and presence of the phosphoryl analog
beryllofluoride.

Bachhawat P(1), Stock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine,
679 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-5627, USA.

The response regulator PhoP is part of the PhoQ/PhoP two-component system
involved in responses to depletion of extracellular Mg(2+). Here, we report the
crystal structures of the receiver domain of Escherichia coli PhoP determined in 
the absence and presence of the phosphoryl analog beryllofluoride. In the
presence of beryllofluoride, the active receiver domain forms a twofold symmetric
dimer similar to that seen in structures of other regulatory domains from the
OmpR/PhoB family, providing further evidence that members of this family utilize 
a common mode of dimerization in the active state. In the absence of activating
agents, the PhoP receiver domain crystallizes with a similar structure,
consistent with the previous observation that high concentrations can promote an 
active state of PhoP independent of phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00049-07 
PMCID: PMC1952025
PMID: 17545283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2007 Feb;63(Pt 2):266-9. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Structure of the response regulator VicR DNA-binding domain.

Trinh CH(1), Liu Y, Phillips SE, Phillips-Jones MK.

Author information: 
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England.

The response regulator VicR from the Gram-positive bacterium Enterococcus
faecalis forms part of the two-component signal transduction system of the YycFG 
subfamily. The structure of the DNA-binding domain of VicR, VicR(c), has been
solved and belongs to the winged helix-turn-helix family. It is very similar to
the DNA-binding domains of Escherichia coli PhoB and OmpR, despite low sequence
similarity, but differs in two important loops. The alpha-loop, which links the
two helices of the helix-turn-helix motif, is similar to that of PhoB, where it
has been implicated in contacting the sigma subunit of RNA polymerase, but
differs from that of OmpR. Conversely, the loop following the helix-turn-helix
motif is similar to that of OmpR and differs from that of PhoB. YycF/VicR, PhoB
and Bacillus subtilis PhoP regulators all recognize almost identical DNA
sequences and although there is currently no experimental evidence linking this
loop with the DNA, the structure is consistent with possible involvement in
selective DNA recognition or binding.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444906043435 
PMCID: PMC2483477
PMID: 17242520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2004 May;186(9):2872-9.

Crystal structure of the response regulator 02 receiver domain, the essential
YycF two-component system of Streptococcus pneumoniae in both complexed and
native states.

Bent CJ(1), Isaacs NW, Mitchell TJ, Riboldi-Tunnicliffe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Division of Infection and Immunity, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, United Kingdom.

A variety of bacterial cellular responses to environmental signals are mediated
by two-component signal transduction systems comprising a membrane-associated
histidine protein kinase and a cytoplasmic response regulator (RR), which
interpret specific stimuli and produce a measured physiological response. In RR
activation, transient phosphorylation of a highly conserved aspartic acid residue
drives the conformation changes needed for full activation of the protein.
Sequence homology reveals that RR02 from Streptococcus pneumoniae belongs to the 
OmpR subfamily of RRs. The structures of the receiver domains from four members
of this family, DrrB and DrrD from Thermotoga maritima, PhoB from Escherichia
coli, and PhoP from Bacillus subtilis, have been elucidated. These domains are
globally very similar in that they are composed of a doubly wound
alpha(5)beta(5); however, they differ remarkably in the fine detail of the
beta4-alpha4 and alpha4 regions. The structures presented here reveal a further
difference of the geometry in this region. RR02 is has been shown to be the
essential RR in the gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae R. Lange, C. Wagner, A.
de Saizieu, N. Flint, J. Molnos, M. Stieger, P. Caspers, M. Kamber, W. Keck, and 
K. E. Amrein, Gene 237:223-234, 1999; J. P. Throup, K. K. Koretke, A. P. Bryant, 
K. A. Ingraham, A. F. Chalker, Y. Ge, A. Marra, N. G. Wallis, J. R. Brown, D. J. 
Holmes, M. Rosenberg, and M. K. Burnham, Mol. Microbiol. 35:566-576, 2000). RR02 
functions as part of a phosphotransfer system that ultimately controls the levels
of competence within the bacteria. Here we report the native structure of the
receiver domain of RR02 from serotype 4 S. pneumoniae (as well as acetate- and
phosphate-bound forms) at different pH levels. Two native structures at 2.3 A,
phased by single-wavelength anomalous diffraction (xenon SAD), and 1.85 A and a
third structure at pH 5.9 revealed the presence of a phosphate ion outside the
active site. The fourth structure revealed the presence of an acetate molecule in
the active site.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.9.2872-2879.2004 
PMCID: PMC387779
PMID: 15090529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2004 Mar;186(5):1493-502.

Residues required for Bacillus subtilis PhoP DNA binding or RNA polymerase
interaction: alanine scanning of PhoP effector domain transactivation loop and
alpha helix 3.

Chen Y(1), Abdel-Fattah WR, Hulett FM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Bacillus subtilis PhoP is a member of the OmpR family of response regulators that
activates or represses genes of the Pho regulon upon phosphorylation by PhoR in
response to phosphate deficiency. Because PhoP binds DNA and is a dimer in
solution independent of its phosphorylation state, phosphorylation of PhoP may
optimize DNA binding or the interaction with RNA polymerase. We describe alanine 
scanning mutagenesis of the PhoP alpha loop and alpha helix 3 region of PhoPC
(Val190 to E214) and functional analysis of the mutated proteins. Eight residues 
important for DNA binding were clustered between Val202 and Arg210. Using in vivo
and in vitro functional analyses, we identified three classes of mutated
proteins. Class I proteins (PhoP(I206A), PhoP(R210A), PhoP(L209A), and
PhoP(H208A)) were phosphorylation proficient and could dimerize but could not
bind DNA or activate transcription in vivo or in vitro. Class II proteins
(PhoP(H205A) and PhoP(V204A)) were phosphorylation proficient and could dimerize 
but could not bind DNA prior to phosphorylation. Members of this class had higher
transcription activation in vitro than in vivo. The class III mutants,
PhoP(V202A) and PhoP(D203A), had a reduced rate of phosphotransfer and could
dimerize but could not bind DNA or activate transcription in vivo or in vitro.
Seven alanine substitutions in PhoP (PhoP(V190A), PhoP(W191A), PhoP(Y193A),
PhoP(F195A), PhoP(G197A,) PhoP(T199A), and PhoP(R200A)) that specifically
affected transcription activation were broadly distributed throughout the
transactivation loop extending from Val190 to as far toward the C terminus as
Arg200. PhoP(W191A) and PhoP(R200A) could not activate transcription, while the
other five mutant proteins showed decreased transcription activation in vivo or
in vitro or both. The mutagenesis studies may indicate that PhoP has a long
transactivation loop and a short alpha helix 3, more similar to OmpR than to PhoB
of Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.5.1493-1502.2004 
PMCID: PMC344424
PMID: 14973033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jan;185(1):254-61.

The crystal structure of the phosphorylation domain in PhoP reveals a functional 
tandem association mediated by an asymmetric interface.

Birck C(1), Chen Y, Hulett FM, Samama JP.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Cristallographie Biologique, IPBS-CNRS, 31077 Toulouse, France.

PhoP from Bacillus subtilis belongs to the OmpR subfamily of response regulators.
It regulates the transcription of several operons and participates in a signal
transduction network that controls adaptation of the bacteria to phosphate
deficiency. The receiver domains of two members of this subfamily, PhoB from
Escherichia coli and DrrD from Thermotoga maritima, have been structurally
characterized. These modules have similar overall folds but display remarkable
differences in the conformation of the beta4-alpha4 and alpha4 regions. The
crystal structure of the receiver domain of PhoP (PhoPN) described in this paper 
illustrates yet another geometry in this region. Another major issue of the
structure determination is the dimeric state of the protein and the novel mode of
association between receiver domains. The protein-protein interface is provided
by two different surfaces from each protomer, and the tandem unit formed through 
this asymmetric interface leaves free interaction surfaces. This design is well
suited for further association of PhoP dimers to form oligomeric structures. The 
interprotein interface buries 970 A(2) from solvent and mostly involves
interactions between charged residues. As described in the accompanying paper,
mutations of a single residue in one salt bridge shielded from solvent prevented 
dimerization of the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated response regulator and
had drastic functional consequences. The three structurally documented members of
the OmpR family (PhoB, DrrD, and PhoP) provide a framework to consider possible
relationships between structural features and sequence signatures in critical
regions of the receiver domains.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.1.254-261.2003 
PMCID: PMC141828
PMID: 12486062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ompR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 27;10(1):3661. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3.

Epistatic Effect of Regulators to the Adaptive Growth of Escherichia coli.

Miyake Y(1), Yamamoto K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan.
(2)Hosei University, Department of Frontier Bioscience, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8584,
Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.
(3)Hosei University, Research Institute of Micro-Nano Technology, Koganei, Tokyo,
184-8584, Japan. kanyamam@hosei.ac.jp.

Bacteria survive in the environment with three steps: a sensing environmental
conditions, a responding to sensed signals, and an adaptation for proper survival
in the environment. An adapting bacterial cell occurs cell division to increase
the number of sister cells, termed adaptive growth. Two-component systems (TCSs),
representing the main bacterial signal transduction systems, consist of a pair of
one sensor kinase (SK) and one response regulator (RR), and RR genes are abundant
in most bacterial genomes as part of the core genome. The OmpR gene family, a
group of RR genes, is conserved in 95% of known bacterial genomes. The
Escherichia coli genome has an estimated 34 RR genes in total, including 14 genes
of OmpR family genes. To reveal the contribution of TCSs for fast growth as an
adaptive growth strategy of E. coli, we isolated a set of gene knockout strains
by using newly developed genome editing technology, the HoSeI (Homologous
Sequence Integration) method, based on CRISPR-Cas9. The statistics of single cell
observation show a knockout of an arbitrary pair of phoP, phoB, and ompR genes,
stably expressed by positive feedback regulation, dramatically inhibit the
optimum adaptive growth of E. coli. These insights suggest that the adaptive
growth of bacteria is fulfilled by the optimum high intracellular level of
regulators acquired during growth under environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60353-3 
PMCID: PMC7046781
PMID: 32108145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Can J Microbiol. 2015 Nov;61(11):799-810. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2015-0345. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Prokaryotic 2-component systems and the OmpR/PhoB superfamily.

Nguyen MP(1), Yoon JM(1), Cho MH(2), Lee SW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Crop Biotech Institute, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446-701, Korea.
(2)b Department of Genetic Engineering and Graduate School of Biotechnology,
Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446-701, Korea.

In bacteria, 2-component regulatory systems (TCSs) are the critical
information-processing pathways that link stimuli to specific adaptive responses.
Signals perceived by membrane sensors, which are generally histidine kinases, are
transmitted by response regulators (RRs) to allow cells to cope rapidly and
effectively with environmental challenges. Over the past few decades, genes
encoding components of TCSs and their responsive proteins have been identified,
crystal structures have been described, and signaling mechanisms have been
elucidated. Here, we review recent findings and interesting breakthroughs in
bacterial TCS research. Furthermore, we discuss structural features, mechanisms
of activation and regulation, and cross-regulation of RRs, with a focus on the
largest RR family, OmpR/PhoB, to provide a comprehensive overview of these
critically important signaling molecules.

DOI: 10.1139/cjm-2015-0345 
PMID: 26382712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. mBio. 2014 Aug 26;5(5):e01684-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01684-14.

The influence of repressor DNA binding site architecture on transcriptional
control.

Park DM(1), Kiley PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA pjkiley@wisc.edu.

How the architecture of DNA binding sites dictates the extent of repression of
promoters is not well understood. Here, we addressed the importance of the number
and information content of the three direct repeats (DRs) in the binding and
repression of the icdA promoter by the phosphorylated form of the global
Escherichia coli repressor ArcA (ArcA-P). We show that decreasing the information
content of the two sites with the highest information (DR1 and DR2) eliminated
ArcA binding to all three DRs and ArcA repression of icdA. Unexpectedly, we also 
found that DR3 occupancy functions principally in repression, since mutation of
this low-information-content site both eliminated DNA binding to DR3 and
significantly weakened icdA repression, despite the fact that binding to DR1 and 
DR2 was intact. In addition, increasing the information content of any one of the
three DRs or addition of a fourth DR increased ArcA-dependent repression but
perturbed signal-dependent regulation of repression. Thus, our data show that the
information content and number of DR elements are critical architectural features
for maintaining a balance between high-affinity binding and signal-dependent
regulation of icdA promoter function in response to changes in ArcA-P levels.
Optimization of such architectural features may be a common strategy to either
dampen or enhance the sensitivity of DNA binding among the members of the large
OmpR/PhoB family of regulators as well as other transcription factors.IMPORTANCE:
In Escherichia coli, the response regulator ArcA maintains homeostasis of redox
carriers under O2-limiting conditions through a comprehensive repression of
carbon oxidation pathways that require aerobic respiration to recycle redox
carriers. Although a binding site architecture comprised of a variable number of 
sequence recognition elements has been identified within the promoter regions of 
ArcA-repressed operons, it is unclear how this variable architecture dictates
transcriptional regulation. By dissecting the role of multiple sequence elements 
within the icdA promoter, we provide insight into the design principles that
allow ArcA to repress transcription within diverse promoter contexts. Our data
suggest that the arrangement of recognition elements is tailored to achieve
sufficient repression of a given promoter while maintaining appropriate
signal-dependent regulation of repression, providing insight into how diverse
binding site architectures link changes in O2 with the fine-tuning of carbon
oxidation pathway levels.

Copyright © 2014 Park and Kiley.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01684-14 
PMCID: PMC4173790
PMID: 25161193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e91760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091760. eCollection
2014.

Atypical response regulator ChxR from Chlamydia trachomatis is structurally
poised for DNA binding.

Barta ML(1), Hickey JM(2), Anbanandam A(3), Dyer K(4), Hammel M(4), Hefty PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas, United States of America.
(3)Del Shankel Structural Biology Center, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
United States of America.
(4)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

ChxR is an atypical two-component signal transduction response regulator (RR) of 
the OmpR/PhoB subfamily encoded by the obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen 
Chlamydia trachomatis. Despite structural homology within both receiver and
effector domains to prototypical subfamily members, ChxR does not require
phosphorylation for dimer formation, DNA binding or transcriptional activation.
Thus, we hypothesized that ChxR is in a conformation optimal for DNA binding with
limited interdomain interactions. To address this hypothesis, the NMR solution
structure of the ChxR effector domain was determined and used in combination with
the previously reported ChxR receiver domain structure to generate a full-length 
dimer model based upon SAXS analysis. Small-angle scattering of ChxR supported a 
dimer with minimal interdomain interactions and effector domains in a
conformation that appears to require only subtle reorientation for optimal
major/minor groove DNA interactions. SAXS modeling also supported that the
effector domains were in a head-to-tail conformation, consistent with ChxR
recognizing tandem DNA repeats. The effector domain structure was leveraged to
identify key residues that were critical for maintaining protein - nucleic acid
interactions. In combination with prior analysis of the essential location of
specific nucleotides for ChxR recognition of DNA, a model of the full-length ChxR
dimer bound to its cognate cis-acting element was generated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091760 
PMCID: PMC3960148
PMID: 24646934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3282. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4282.

An asymmetric heterodomain interface stabilizes a response regulator-DNA complex.

Narayanan A(1), Kumar S(2), Evrard AN(3), Paul LN(4), Yernool DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2].
(2)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2] [3].
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State Street,
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.
(4)Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue University, 1203 West State Street, West
Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.
(5)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 West State
Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA [2] Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue 
University, 1203 West State Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Two-component signal transduction systems consist of pairs of histidine kinases
and response regulators, which mediate adaptive responses to environmental cues. 
Most activated response regulators regulate transcription by binding tightly to
promoter DNA via a phosphorylation-triggered inactive-to-active transition. The
molecular basis for formation of stable response regulator-DNA complexes that
precede the assembly of RNA polymerases is unclear. Here, we present structures
of DNA complexed with the response regulator KdpE, a member of the OmpR/PhoB
family. The distinctively asymmetric complex in an active-like conformation
reveals a unique intramolecular interface between the receiver domain (RD) and
the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of only one of the two response regulators in the
complex. Structure-function studies show that this RD-DBD interface is necessary 
to form stable complexes that support gene expression. The conservation of
sequence and structure suggests that these findings extend to a large group of
response regulators that act as transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4282 
PMCID: PMC4399498
PMID: 24526190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Biol. 2013 May 27;425(10):1612-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.02.003. Epub
2013 Feb 8.

Comprehensive analysis of OmpR phosphorylation, dimerization, and DNA binding
supports a canonical model for activation.

Barbieri CM(1), Wu T, Stock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, 679 Hoes Lane West, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The OmpR/PhoB family of response regulators (RRs) is the largest class of
two-component system signal transduction proteins. Extensive biochemical and
structural characterization of these transcription factors has provided insights 
into their activation and DNA-binding mechanisms. For the most part, OmpR/PhoB
family proteins are thought to become activated through phosphorylation from
their cognate histidine kinase partners, which in turn facilitates an allosteric 
change in the RR, enabling homodimerization and subsequently enhanced DNA
binding. Incongruently, it has been suggested that OmpR, the eponymous member of 
this RR family, becomes activated via different mechanisms, whereby DNA binding
plays a central role in facilitating dimerization and phosphorylation.
Characterization of the rate and extent of the phosphorylation of OmpR and OmpR
DNA-binding mutants following activation of the EnvZ/OmpR two-component system
shows that DNA binding is not essential for phosphorylation of OmpR in vivo. In
addition, detailed analyses of the energetics of DNA binding and dimerization of 
OmpR in both its unphosphorylated and phosphorylated state indicate that
phosphorylation enhances OmpR dimerization and that this dimerization enhancement
is the energetic driving force for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of
OmpR-DNA binding. These findings suggest that OmpR phosphorylation-mediated
activation follows the same paradigm as the other members of the OmpR/PhoB family
of RRs in contrast to previously proposed models of OmpR activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.02.003 
PMCID: PMC3646996
PMID: 23399542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030102. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Structure-function studies of DNA binding domain of response regulator KdpE
reveals equal affinity interactions at DNA half-sites.

Narayanan A(1), Paul LN, Tomar S, Patil DN, Kumar P, Yernool DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
United States of America.

Expression of KdpFABC, a K(+) pump that restores osmotic balance, is controlled
by binding of the response regulator KdpE to a specific DNA sequence
(kdpFABC(BS)) via the winged helix-turn-helix type DNA binding domain
(KdpE(DBD)). Exploration of E. coli KdpE(DBD) and kdpFABC(BS) interaction
resulted in the identification of two conserved, AT-rich 6 bp direct repeats that
form half-sites. Despite binding to these half-sites, KdpE(DBD) was incapable of 
promoting gene expression in vivo. Structure-function studies guided by our 2.5 Å
X-ray structure of KdpE(DBD) revealed the importance of residues R193 and R200 in
the α-8 DNA recognition helix and T215 in the wing region for DNA binding.
Mutation of these residues renders KdpE incapable of inducing expression of the
kdpFABC operon. Detailed biophysical analysis of interactions using analytical
ultracentrifugation revealed a 2∶1 stoichiometry of protein to DNA with
dissociation constants of 200±100 and 350±100 nM at half-sites. Inactivation of
one half-site does not influence binding at the other, indicating that KdpE(DBD) 
binds independently to the half-sites with approximately equal affinity and no
discernable cooperativity. To our knowledge, these data are the first to describe
in quantitative terms the binding at half-sites under equilibrium conditions for 
a member of the ubiquitous OmpR/PhoB family of proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030102 
PMCID: PMC3264566
PMID: 22291906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010;18(1):24-36. doi: 10.1159/000274309. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

The complexities of porin genetic regulation.

De la Cruz MA(1), Calva E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Cuernavaca, México.

Our understanding of porin regulation has revealed not only increasing complexity
in the regulatory mechanisms, but also that the porin repertoire is more
extensive than previously conceived. Initially, the OmpR response regulator was
described as the master regulator of porin genes, but many more regulators are
involved such as CpxR, PhoB, Lrp, Rob, MarA, SoxS, CadC, CRP, Fnr, ToxR, H-NS,
StpA, IHF, HU and LeuO. In addition to MicF, the first small RNA (sRNA) that was 
proposed to regulate porin expression, porins are post-transcriptionally
regulated by a variety of other sRNAs, namely, MicC, MicA, IpeX, RseX, InvR, CyaR
and RybB. Future challenges include the full integration of all the regulatory
circuitries. Whether quiescent porins are merely replacements of the major porins
or are part of novel metabolic programs has yet to be elucidated. The
comprehensive exploration of the environmental determinants that affect porin
gene expression should yield valuable new information about the functions of
these important proteins.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000274309 
PMID: 20068355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(6):1358-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06355.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 9.

System-level mapping of Escherichia coli response regulator dimerization with
FRET hybrids.

Gao R(1), Tao Y, Stock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Howard HughesMedical
Institute, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(6):1336-40.

SUMMARY: Two-component signal transduction, featuring highly conserved histidine 
kinases (HKs) and response regulators (RRs), is one of the most prevalent
signalling schemes in prokaryotes. RRs function as phosphorylation-activated
switches to mediate diverse output responses, mostly via transcription
regulation. As bacterial genomes typically encode multiple two-component proteins
for distinct signalling pathways, the sequence and structural similarities of RR 
receiver domains create significant challenges to maintain interaction
specificity. It is especially demanding for members of the OmpR/PhoB subfamily,
the largest RR subfamily, which share a conserved dimerization interface for
phosphorylation-mediated transcription regulation. We developed a strategy to
investigate RR interaction by analysing Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) 
between cyan fluorescent protein (CFP)- and yellow fluorescent protein
(YFP)-fused RRs in vitro. Using the Escherichia coli RR PhoB as a model system,
we were able to observe phosphorylation-dependent FRET between fluorescent
protein (FP)-PhoB proteins and validated the FRET method by determining
dimerization affinity and dimerization-coupled phosphorylation kinetics that
recapitulated values determined by alternative methods. Further application of
the FRET method to all E. coli OmpR/PhoB subfamily RRs revealed that
phosphorylation-activated RR interaction is indeed a common theme for OmpR/PhoB
subfamily RRs and these RRs display significant interaction specificity. Weak
hetero-pair interactions were also identified between several different RRs,
suggesting potential cross-regulation between distinct pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06355.x 
PMCID: PMC2586830
PMID: 18631241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8664-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705550200. Epub 2008 
Jan 14.

Amino acids important for DNA recognition by the response regulator OmpR.

Rhee JE(1), Sheng W, Morgan LK, Nolet R, Liao X, Kenney LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL
60612, USA.

Response regulators undergo regulated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation at
conserved aspartic acid residues in bacterial signal transduction systems. OmpR
is a winged helix-turnhelix DNA-binding protein that functions as a global
regulator in bacteria and is also important in pathogenesis. A detailed
mechanistic picture of how OmpR binds to DNA and activates transcription is
lacking. We used NMR spectroscopy to solve the solution structure of the
C-terminal domain of OmpR (OmpR(C)) and to analyze the chemical shift changes
that occur upon DNA binding. There is little overlap in the interaction surface
with residues of PhoB that were reportedly involved in protein/protein
interactions in its head-to-tail dimer. Multiple factors account for the lack of 
overlap. One is that the spacing between the OmpR half-sites is shorter than
observed with PhoB, requiring the arrangement of the two OmpR molecules to be
different from that of the PhoB dimer on DNA. A second is the demonstration
herein that OmpR can bind to its high affinity site as a monomer. As a result,
OmpR(C) appears to be capable of adopting alternative orientations depending on
the precise base composition of the binding site, which also contributes to the
lack of overlap. In the presence of DNA, chemical shift changes occur in OmpR in 
the recognition alpha-helix 3, the loop between beta-strand 4 and alpha-helix 1, 
and the loop between beta-strands 5 and 6. DNA contact residues are Val(203) (T),
Arg(207) (G), and Arg(209) (phosphate backbone). Our results suggest that OmpR
binds to DNA as a monomer and then forms a symmetric or asymmetric dimer,
depending on the binding site. We propose that during activation OmpR binds to
DNA and undergoes a conformational change that promotes phosphorylation of the
N-terminal receiver domain, the receiver domains dimerize, and then the second
monomer binds to DNA. The flexible linker of OmpR enables the second monomer to
bind in multiple orientations (head-to-tail and head-to-head), depending on the
specific DNA contacts.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M705550200 
PMCID: PMC2417188
PMID: 18195018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (ftsE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 1994 Sep;140 ( Pt 9):2289-98.

Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of a 15 kb region of the Bacillus subtilis
genome containing the iol operon.

Yoshida K(1), Sano H, Miwa Y, Ogasawara N, Fujita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering, Fukuyama University,
Japan.

Within the framework of an international project on the sequencing of the whole
Bacillus subtilis genome, a 15 kb chromosome segment, which contains the iol
operon involved in inositol utilization, has been cloned and sequenced. This
region (14,974 bp) contains 12 complete open reading frames (ORFs; genes) and two
partial ones; the seventh gene (E83G) is the idh gene encoding inositol
dehydrogenase. All the genes identified are transcribed in the same direction as 
that of the movement of the replication fork. A homology search for their
products deduced from the 12 complete ORFs revealed that eight of them exhibit
significant homology to known proteins such as fructokinase, acetolactate
synthase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (B. subtilis), and PhoB and FtsE
proteins (Escherichia coli). It also implied that two genes (B65D and B65E) might
encode a set of two-component regulatory proteins and that the B65F gene might
encode a protein belonging to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family. Based on the
features of the nucleotide sequence determined and the results of the homology
search, the primary structure of the iol operon is predicted.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-140-9-2289 
PMID: 7952181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoB) AND (cpxR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mSystems. 2020 Nov 10;5(6). pii: e00980-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00980-20.

Elucidation of Regulatory Modes for Five Two-Component Systems in Escherichia
coli Reveals Novel Relationships.

Choudhary KS(#)(1), Kleinmanns JA(#)(1), Decker K(#)(1), Sastry AV(1), Gao Y(1), 
Szubin R(1), Seif Y(1), Palsson BO(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA palsson@ucsd.edu.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(#)Contributed equally

Escherichia coli uses two-component systems (TCSs) to respond to environmental
signals. TCSs affect gene expression and are parts of E. coli's global
transcriptional regulatory network (TRN). Here, we identified the regulons of
five TCSs in E. coli MG1655: BaeSR and CpxAR, which were stimulated by ethanol
stress; KdpDE and PhoRB, induced by limiting potassium and phosphate,
respectively; and ZraSR, stimulated by zinc. We analyzed RNA-seq data using
independent component analysis (ICA). ChIP-exo data were used to validate
condition-specific target gene binding sites. Based on these data, we do the
following: (i) identify the target genes for each TCS; (ii) show how the target
genes are transcribed in response to stimulus; and (iii) reveal novel
relationships between TCSs, which indicate noncognate inducers for various
response regulators, such as BaeR to iron starvation, CpxR to phosphate
limitation, and PhoB and ZraR to cell envelope stress. Our understanding of the
TRN in E. coli is thus notably expanded.IMPORTANCE E. coli is a common commensal 
microbe found in the human gut microenvironment; however, some strains cause
diseases like diarrhea, urinary tract infections, and meningitis. E. coli's
two-component systems (TCSs) modulate target gene expression, especially related 
to virulence, pathogenesis, and antimicrobial peptides, in response to
environmental stimuli. Thus, it is of utmost importance to understand the
transcriptional regulation of TCSs to infer bacterial environmental adaptation
and disease pathogenicity. Utilizing a combinatorial approach integrating RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq), independent component analysis, chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with exonuclease treatment (ChIP-exo), and data
mining, we suggest five different modes of TCS transcriptional regulation. Our
data further highlight noncognate inducers of TCSs, which emphasizes the
cross-regulatory nature of TCSs in E. coli and suggests that TCSs may have a role
beyond their cognate functionalities. In summary, these results can lead to an
understanding of the metabolic capabilities of bacteria and correctly predict
complex phenotype under diverse conditions, especially when further incorporated 
with genome-scale metabolic models.

Copyright © 2020 Choudhary et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00980-20 
PMCID: PMC7657598
PMID: 33172971 


2. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010;18(1):24-36. doi: 10.1159/000274309. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

The complexities of porin genetic regulation.

De la Cruz MA(1), Calva E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Cuernavaca, México.

Our understanding of porin regulation has revealed not only increasing complexity
in the regulatory mechanisms, but also that the porin repertoire is more
extensive than previously conceived. Initially, the OmpR response regulator was
described as the master regulator of porin genes, but many more regulators are
involved such as CpxR, PhoB, Lrp, Rob, MarA, SoxS, CadC, CRP, Fnr, ToxR, H-NS,
StpA, IHF, HU and LeuO. In addition to MicF, the first small RNA (sRNA) that was 
proposed to regulate porin expression, porins are post-transcriptionally
regulated by a variety of other sRNAs, namely, MicC, MicA, IpeX, RseX, InvR, CyaR
and RybB. Future challenges include the full integration of all the regulatory
circuitries. Whether quiescent porins are merely replacements of the major porins
or are part of novel metabolic programs has yet to be elucidated. The
comprehensive exploration of the environmental determinants that affect porin
gene expression should yield valuable new information about the functions of
these important proteins.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000274309 
PMID: 20068355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):225-31.

Identification of UvrY as the cognate response regulator for the BarA sensor
kinase in Escherichia coli.

Pernestig AK(1), Melefors O, Georgellis D.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

BarA is a membrane-associated protein that belongs to a subclass of tripartite
sensors of the two-component signal transduction system family. In this study, we
report that UvrY is the cognate response regulator for BarA of Escherichia coli. 
This conclusion is based upon homologies with analogous two-component systems and
demonstrated by both biochemical and genetic means. We show that the purified
BarA protein is able to autophosphorylate when incubated with [gamma-(32)P]ATP
but not with [alpha-(32)P]ATP or [gamma-(32)P]GTP. Phosphorylated BarA, in turn, 
acts as an efficient phosphoryl group donor to UvrY but not to the non-cognate
response regulators ArcA, PhoB, or CpxR. The specificity of the
transphosphorylation reaction is further supported by the fact that UvrY can
receive the phosphoryl group from BarA-P but not from the non-cognate tripartite 
sensor ArcB-P or ATP. In addition, genetic evidence that BarA and UvrY mediate
the same signal transduction pathway is provided by the finding that both uvrY
and barA mutant strains exhibit the same hydrogen peroxide hypersensitive
phenotype. These results provide the first biochemical evidence as well as
genetic support for a link between BarA and UvrY, suggesting that the two
proteins constitute a new two-component system for gene regulation in Escherichia
coli.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001550200 
PMID: 11022030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpP) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Jun;307(2):120-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Accumulation of sigmaS due to enhanced synthesis and decreased degradation in
acidic phospholipid-deficient Escherichia coli cells.

Uchiyama J(1), Sasaki Y, Nagahama H, Itou A, Matsuoka S, Matsumoto K, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science
and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.

The Escherichia coli pgsA3 mutation, which causes deficiency in acidic
phospholipids, leads to a significant accumulation of sigma(S). This accumulation
is partly accounted for by the higher transcription level of rpoS; however, it
has also been suggested that the cells accumulate sigma(S)
post-transcriptionally. We found that the level of the small regulatory RNA RprA,
which is involved in the promotion of rpoS translation, is higher in pgsA3 cells 
than in pgsA(+) cells. Induction of altered rpoS mRNA that does not depend on
RprA in pgsA(+) cells did not increase the level of sigma(S) to the high level
observed in pgsA3 cells, suggesting post-translational sigma(S) accumulation in
the latter. The mRNA levels of clpX and clpP, whose products form a ClpXP
protease that degrades sigma(S), were much reduced in pgsA3 cells. Consistent
with the reduced mRNA levels, the half-life of sigma(S) in pgsA3 cells was much
longer than in pgsA(+) cells, indicating that downregulation of the degradation
is a major cause for the high sigma(S) content. We show that the downregulation
can be partially attributed to activated CpxAR in the mutant cells, which causes 
repression of rpoE on whose gene product the expression of clpPX depends.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x 
PMID: 20455949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Extremophiles. 2004 Jun;8(3):209-17. Epub 2004 Feb 27.

Transcriptional analysis of dynamic heat-shock response by the hyperthermophilic 
bacterium Thermotoga maritima.

Pysz MA(1), Ward DE, Shockley KR, Montero CI, Conners SB, Johnson MR, Kelly RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC 27695-7905, USA.

The thermal stress response of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga
maritima was characterized using a 407-open reading frame-targeted cDNA
microarray. Transient gene expression was followed for 90 min, following a shift 
from 80 degrees C to 90 degrees C. While some aspects of mesophilic heat-shock
response were conserved in T. maritima, genome content suggested differentiating 
features that were borne out by transcriptional analysis. Early induction of
predicted heat-shock operons hrcA-grpE-dnaJ (TM0851-TM0850-TM0849), groES-groEL
(TM0505-TM0506), and dnaK-sHSP (TM0373-TM0374) was consistent with conserved
CIRCE elements upstream of hrcA and groES. Induction of the T. maritima rpoE/
sigW and rpoD/ sigA homologs suggests a mechanism for global heat-shock response 
in the absence of an identifiable ortholog to a major heat-shock sigma factor. In
contrast to heat-shock response in Escherichia coli, the majority of genes
encoding ATP-dependent proteases were downregulated, including clpP (TM0695),
clpQ (TM0521), clpY (TM0522), lonA (TM1633), and lonB (TM1869). Notably, T.
maritima showed indications of a late heat-shock response with the induction of a
marR homolog (TM0816), several other putative transcriptional regulators (TM1023,
TM1069), and two alpha-glucosidases (TM0434 and TM1068). Taken together, the
results reported here indicate that, while T. maritima shares core elements of
the bacterial heat-shock response with mesophiles, the thermal stress regulatory 
strategies of this organism differ significantly. However, it remains to be
elucidated whether these differences are related to thermophilicity or
phylogenetic placement.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-004-0379-2 
PMID: 14991425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((clpX) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Jun;307(2):120-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Accumulation of sigmaS due to enhanced synthesis and decreased degradation in
acidic phospholipid-deficient Escherichia coli cells.

Uchiyama J(1), Sasaki Y, Nagahama H, Itou A, Matsuoka S, Matsumoto K, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science
and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.

The Escherichia coli pgsA3 mutation, which causes deficiency in acidic
phospholipids, leads to a significant accumulation of sigma(S). This accumulation
is partly accounted for by the higher transcription level of rpoS; however, it
has also been suggested that the cells accumulate sigma(S)
post-transcriptionally. We found that the level of the small regulatory RNA RprA,
which is involved in the promotion of rpoS translation, is higher in pgsA3 cells 
than in pgsA(+) cells. Induction of altered rpoS mRNA that does not depend on
RprA in pgsA(+) cells did not increase the level of sigma(S) to the high level
observed in pgsA3 cells, suggesting post-translational sigma(S) accumulation in
the latter. The mRNA levels of clpX and clpP, whose products form a ClpXP
protease that degrades sigma(S), were much reduced in pgsA3 cells. Consistent
with the reduced mRNA levels, the half-life of sigma(S) in pgsA3 cells was much
longer than in pgsA(+) cells, indicating that downregulation of the degradation
is a major cause for the high sigma(S) content. We show that the downregulation
can be partially attributed to activated CpxAR in the mutant cells, which causes 
repression of rpoE on whose gene product the expression of clpPX depends.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.01964.x 
PMID: 20455949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cueR) AND (copA;copA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Nov 8;294(45):16978-16991. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010023. Epub 
2019 Oct 4.

Zinc excess increases cellular demand for iron and decreases tolerance to copper 
in Escherichia coli.

Xu Z(1), Wang P(1), Wang H(2), Yu ZH(2), Au-Yeung HY(2), Hirayama T(3), Sun H(2),
Yan A(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong,
China.
(3)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Gifu Pharmaceutical
University, 1-25-4, Dairaku-nishi, Gifu, 501-1196, Japan.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, China ayan8@hku.hk.

Transition metals serve as an important class of micronutrients that are
indispensable for bacterial physiology but are cytotoxic when they are in excess.
Bacteria have developed exquisite homeostatic systems to control the uptake,
storage, and efflux of each of biological metals and maintain a thermodynamically
balanced metal quota. However, whether the pathways that control the homeostasis 
of different biological metals cross-talk and render cross-resistance or
sensitivity in the host-pathogen interface remains largely unknown. Here, we
report that zinc (Zn) excess perturbs iron (Fe) and copper (Cu) homeostasis in
Escherichia coli, resulting in increased Fe and decreased Cu levels in the cell. 
Gene expression analysis revealed that Zn excess transiently up-regulates
Fe-uptake genes and down-regulates Fe-storage genes and thereby increases the
cellular Fe quota. In vitro and in vivo protein-DNA binding assays revealed that 
the elevated intracellular Fe poisons the primary Cu detoxification transcription
regulator CueR, resulting in dysregulation of its target genes copA and cueO and 
activation of the secondary Cu detoxification system CusSR-cusCFBA
Supplementation with the Fe chelator 2,2'-dipyridyl (DIP) or with the reducing
agent GSH abolished the induction of cusCFBA during Zn excess. Consistent with
the importance of this metal homeostatic network in cell physiology, combined
metal treatment, including simultaneously overloading cells with both Zn (0.25
mm) and Cu (0.25 mm) and sequestering Fe with DIP (50 μm), substantially
inhibited E. coli growth. These results advance our understanding of bacterial
metallobiology and may inform the development of metal-based antimicrobial
regimens to manage infectious diseases.

© 2019 Xu et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010023 
PMCID: PMC6851343
PMID: 31586033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Aug;103(16):6797-6807. doi:
10.1007/s00253-019-09984-9. Epub 2019 Jun 25.

Biodetection and bioremediation of copper ions in environmental water samples
using a temperature-controlled, dual-functional Escherichia coli cell.

Wang W(1), Jiang F(2), Wu F(2), Li J(2), Ge R(2), Li J(2), Tan G(2), Pang Y(2),
Zhou X(2), Ren X(2), Fan B(2), Lyu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China. wangwu@wmu.edu.cn.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China. jxlu313@163.com.

Although a variety of whole-cell biosensors and biosorbents have been developed
for detection and removal of heavy metal contaminants, few whole cells can be
applied to both monitoring and remediation of copper pollution in water. In this 
study, a modified plasmid was constructed by incorporating a copper-sensing
element and a copper-adsorbing element into a temperature-inducible plasmid,
pBV220. This plasmid was subsequently transformed into an engineered Escherichia 
coli strain lacking copA and cueO. This dual-functional E. coli cell selectively 
responded to copper ions with a linear detection range of 0.01-25 μM at 37 °C and
could express surface-displayed CueR when treated at 42 °C without any costly
chemical inducers. The display of CueR on the cell surface specifically enhanced 
its copper adsorption capacity and rapidly removed copper ions from aqueous
solutions. In addition, the CueR surface-displayed cells could be regenerated by 
adsorption-desorption cycles via pH regulation. Moreover, by simply using two
different temperatures, the detection or adsorption of copper using this
dual-functional whole cell was achieved without any cross-interference. Most
importantly, it provided highly sensitive, accurate quantification, and effective
removal of copper in real environmental water samples. Thus, this E. coli cell
can be used for large-scale detection and remediation of copper pollutants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-019-09984-9 
PMID: 31240366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2018 Jul 10;200(15). pii: e00761-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00761-17. Print
2018 Aug 1.

Metabolic Reprogramming of Vibrio cholerae Impaired in Respiratory NADH Oxidation
Is Accompanied by Increased Copper Sensitivity.

Toulouse C(1), Metesch K(1), Pfannstiel J(2), Steuber J(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Microbiology, Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)University of Hohenheim, Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Microbiology, Stuttgart, Germany
julia.steuber@uni-hohenheim.de.

The electrogenic, sodium ion-translocating NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQR) from
Vibrio cholerae is frequent in pathogenic bacteria and a potential target for
antibiotics. NQR couples the oxidation of NADH to the formation of a sodium
motive force (SMF) and therefore drives important processes, such as flagellar
rotation, substrate uptake, and energy-dissipating cation-proton antiport. We
performed a quantitative proteome analysis of V. cholerae O395N1 compared to its 
variant lacking the NQR using minimal medium with glucose as the carbon source.
We found 84 proteins (regulation factor of ≥2) to be changed in abundance. The
loss of NQR resulted in a decrease in the abundance of enzymes of the oxidative
branch of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and an increase in abundance of
virulence factors AcfC and TcpA. Most unexpected, the copper resistance proteins 
CopA, CopG, and CueR were decreased in the nqr deletion strain. As a consequence,
the mutant exhibited diminished resistance to copper compared to the reference
strain, as confirmed in growth studies using either glucose or mixed amino acids 
as carbon sources. We propose that the observed adaptations of the nqr deletion
strain represent a coordinated response which counteracts a drop in transmembrane
voltage that challenges V. cholerae in its different habitats.IMPORTANCE The
importance of the central metabolism for bacterial virulence has raised interest 
in studying catabolic enzymes not present in the host, such as NQR, as putative
targets for antibiotics. Vibrio cholerae lacking the NQR, which is studied here, 
is a model to estimate the impact of specific NQR inhibitors on the phenotype of 
a pathogen. Our comparative proteomic study provides a framework to evaluate the 
chances of success of compounds directed against NQR with respect to their
bacteriostatic or bactericidal action.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00761-17 
PMCID: PMC6040201
PMID: 29735761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Feb;102(3):1513-1521. doi:
10.1007/s00253-017-8677-7. Epub 2017 Dec 15.

Enhancing the copper-sensing capability of Escherichia coli-based whole-cell
bioreporters by genetic engineering.

Kang Y(#)(1), Lee W(#)(1), Kim S(1), Jang G(2), Kim BG(3), Yoon Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute of Agriculture
and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department Forest Resources, Gyeongnam National University of Science and
Technology, 33 Dongjin-ro, Jinju-si, Gyeongsangman-do, 52725, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. yyoon21@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Metals are essential to all organisms; accordingly, cells employ numerous genes
to maintain metal homeostasis as high levels can be toxic. In the present study, 
the gene operons responsive to metal(loid)s were employed to generate bacterial
cell-based biosensors to detect target metal(loid)s. The cluster of genes related
to copper transport known as the cop-operon is regulated by the interaction
between the copA promoter region (copAp) and CueR, turning on and off gene
expression upon copper ion binding. Therefore, the detection of copper ions could
be achieved by inserting a plasmid harboring the fusion of copAp and reporter
genes, such as enzymes and fluorescent genes. However, copAp is not as strong a
promoter as other metal-inducible promoters, such as znt-, mer-, and ars-operons;
thereby, its sensitivity toward copper ions was not sufficient for
quantification. To overcome this problem, we engineered Escherichia coli with a
deletion of copA to interfere with copper export from cells. The engineered E.
coli whole-cell bioreporter was able to detect copper ions at 0 to 10 μM in an
aqueous solution. Most importantly, it was specific to copper among several
tested heavy metal(loid)s. Therefore, it will likely be useful to detect copper
in diverse environmental systems. Although additional improvements are still
required to optimize the E. coli-based copper-sensing whole-cell bioreporters
presented in this study, our results suggest that there is huge potential to
generate whole-cell bioreporters for additional targets by molecular engineering.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-017-8677-7 
PMID: 29243083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jun 27;114(26):6818-6823. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1620232114. Epub 2017 Jun 13.

Interplay between tolerance mechanisms to copper and acid stress in Escherichia
coli.

Djoko KY(1), Phan MD(2), Peters KM(2), Walker MJ(2), Schembri MA(2), McEwan
AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072,
Australia k.djoko@uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072,
Australia.

Copper (Cu) is a key antibacterial component of the host innate immune system and
almost all bacterial species possess systems that defend against the toxic
effects of excess Cu. The Cu tolerance system in Gram-negative bacteria is
composed minimally of a Cu sensor (CueR) and a Cu export pump (CopA). The cueR
and copA genes are encoded on the chromosome typically as a divergent but
contiguous operon. In Escherichia coli, cueR and copA are separated by two
additional genes, ybaS and ybaT, which confer glutamine (Gln)-dependent acid
tolerance and contribute to the glutamate (Glu)-dependent acid resistance system 
in this organism. Here we show that Cu strongly inhibits growth of a ∆copA mutant
strain in acidic cultures. We further demonstrate that Cu stress impairs the
pathway for Glu biosynthesis via glutamate synthase, leading to decreased
intracellular levels of Glu. Addition of exogenous Glu rescues the ∆copA mutant
from Cu stress in acidic conditions. Gln is also protective but this relies on
the activities of YbaS and YbaT. Notably, expression of both enzymes is
up-regulated during Cu stress. These results demonstrate a link between Cu
stress, acid stress, and Glu/Gln metabolism, establish a role for YbaS and YbaT
in Cu tolerance, and suggest that subtle changes in core metabolic pathways may
contribute to overcoming host-imposed copper toxicity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1620232114 
PMCID: PMC5495233
PMID: 28611214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Front Mol Biosci. 2017 Feb 28;4:9. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00009. eCollection
2017.

The Copper Efflux Regulator CueR Is Subject to ATP-Dependent Proteolysis in
Escherichia coli.

Bittner LM(1), Kraus A(1), Schäkermann S(1), Narberhaus F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Biology, Ruhr University Bochum Bochum, Germany.

The trace element copper serves as cofactor for many enzymes but is toxic at
elevated concentrations. In bacteria, the intracellular copper level is
maintained by copper efflux systems including the Cue system controlled by the
transcription factor CueR. CueR, a member of the MerR family, forms homodimers,
and binds monovalent copper ions with high affinity. It activates transcription
of the copper tolerance genes copA and cueO via a conserved DNA-distortion
mechanism. The mechanism how CueR-induced transcription is turned off is not
fully understood. Here, we report that Escherichia coli CueR is prone to
proteolysis by the AAA+ proteases Lon, ClpXP, and ClpAP. Using a set of CueR
variants, we show that CueR degradation is not altered by mutations affecting
copper binding, dimerization or DNA binding of CueR, but requires an accessible C
terminus. Except for a twofold stabilization shortly after a copper pulse,
proteolysis of CueR is largely copper-independent. Our results suggest that
ATP-dependent proteolysis contributes to copper homeostasis in E. coli by
turnover of CueR, probably to allow steady monitoring of changes of the
intracellular copper level and shut-off of CueR-dependent transcription.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00009 
PMCID: PMC5329002
PMID: 28293558 


7. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013 Jun;79(12):3619-27. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03944-12. Epub 
2013 Apr 5.

Iron and copper act synergistically to delay anaerobic growth of bacteria.

Bird LJ(1), Coleman ML, Newman DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

Transition metals are known to cause toxic effects through their interaction with
oxygen, but toxicity under anoxic conditions is poorly understood. Here we
investigated the effects of iron (Fe) and copper (Cu) on the anaerobic growth and
gene expression of the purple phototrophic bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris
TIE-1. We found that Fe(II) and Cu(II) act synergistically to delay anaerobic
growth at environmentally relevant metal concentrations. Cu(I) and Cu(II) had
similar effects both alone and in the presence of ascorbate, a Cu(II) reductant, 
indicating that reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) by Fe(II) is not sufficient to
explain the growth inhibition. Addition of Cu(II) increased the toxicity of
Co(II) and Ni(II); in contrast, Ni(II) toxicity was diminished in the presence of
Fe(II). The synergistic anaerobic toxicity of Fe(II) and Cu(II) was also observed
for Escherichia coli MG1655, Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, and Rhodobacter
capsulatus SB1003. Gene expression analyses for R. palustris identified three
regulatory genes that respond to Cu(II) and not to Fe(II): homologs of cueR and
cusR, two known proteobacterial copper homeostasis regulators, and csoR, a copper
regulator recently identified in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Two P-type ATPase
efflux pumps, along with an F(o)F(1) ATP synthase, were also upregulated by
Cu(II) but not by Fe(II). An Escherichia coli mutant deficient in copA, cus, and 
cueO showed a smaller synergistic effect, indicating that iron might interfere
with one or more of the copper homeostasis systems. Our results suggest that
interactive effects of transition metals on microbial physiology may be
widespread under anoxic conditions, although the molecular mechanisms remain to
be more fully elucidated.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03944-12 
PMCID: PMC3675935
PMID: 23563938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Feb;87(3):466-77. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12107. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

The copper supply pathway to a Salmonella Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SodCII)
involves P(1B)-type ATPase copper efflux and periplasmic CueP.

Osman D(1), Patterson CJ, Bailey K, Fisher K, Robinson NJ, Rigby SE, Cavet JS.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, University of Manchester, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2013 Feb;87(3):447-54.

Periplasmic Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutases (Cu,Zn-SODs) are implicated in bacterial 
virulence. It has been proposed that some bacterial P(1B)-type ATPases supply
copper to periplasmic cupro-proteins and such transporters have also been
implicated in virulence. Here we show that either of two P(1B)-type ATPases, CopA
or GolT, is needed to activate a periplasmic Cu,Zn-SOD (SodCII) in Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium. A ΔcopA/ΔgolT mutant accumulates inactive Zn-SodCII
which can be activated by copper-supplementation in vitro. In contrast, either
single ATPase mutant accumulates fully active Cu,Zn-SodCII. A contribution of
GolT to copper handling is consistent with its copper-responsive transcription
mediated by DNA-binding metal-responsive activator GolS. The requirement for
duplicate transcriptional activators CueR and GolS remains unclear since both
have similar tight K(Cu). Mutants lacking periplasmic cupro-protein CueP also
accumulate inactive Zn-SodCII and while CopA and GolT show functional redundancy,
both require CueP to activate SodCII in vivo. Zn-SodCII is also activated in
vitro by incubation with Cu-CueP and this coincides with copper transfer as
monitored by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. These experiments
establish a role for CueP within the copper supply pathway for Salmonella
Cu,Zn-SodCII. Copper binding by CueP in this pathogen may confer protection of
the periplasm from copper-mediated damage while sustaining vital cupro-enzyme
activity.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12107 
PMID: 23171030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Microbiology (Reading). 2012 Aug;158(Pt 8):2005-2016. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.059345-0. Epub 2012 May 31.

Periplasmic proteins encoded by VCA0261-0260 and VC2216 genes together with copA 
and cueR products are required for copper tolerance but not for virulence in
Vibrio cholerae.

Marrero K(1), Sánchez A(2), González LJ(2), Ledón T(1), Rodríguez-Ulloa A(3),
Castellanos-Serra L(2), Pérez C(1), Fando R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Centre for Scientific Research, PO
Box 6412, Havana, Cuba.
(2)Department of Proteomics, Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, PO
Box 6162, Havana, Cuba.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, PO Box 6162, Havana, Cuba.

The bacterial pathogen Vibrio cholerae requires colonizination of the human small
intestine to cause cholera. The anaerobic and slightly acidic conditions
predominating there enhance toxicity of low copper concentrations and create a
selective environment for bacteria with evolved detoxifying mechanisms. We
reported previously that the VCA0260, VCA0261 and VC2216 gene products were
synthesized only in V. cholerae grown in microaerobiosis or anaerobiosis. Here we
show that ORFs VCA0261 and VCA0260 are actually combined into a single gene
encoding a 18.7 kDa protein. Bioinformatic analyses linked this protein and the
VC2216 gene product to copper tolerance. Following the approach of predict-mutate
and test, we describe for the first time, to our knowledge, the copper tolerance 
systems operating in V. cholerae. Copper susceptibility analyses of mutants in
VCA0261-0260, VC2216 or in the putative copper-tolerance-related VC2215 (copA
ATPase) and VC0974 (cueR), under aerobic and anaerobic growth, revealed that CopA
represents the main tolerance system under both conditions. The VC2216-encoded
periplasmic protein contributes to resistance only under anaerobiosis in a
CopA-functional background. The locus tag VCA0261-0260 encodes a
copper-inducible, CueR-dependent, periplasmic protein, which mediates tolerance
in aerobiosis, but under anaerobiosis its role is only evident in CopA knock-out 
mutants. None of the genes involved in copper homeostasis were required for V.
cholerae virulence or colonization in the mouse model. We conclude that copper
tolerance in V. cholerae, which lacks orthologues of the periplasmic copper
tolerance proteins CueO, CusCFBA and CueP, involves CopA and CueR proteins along 
with the periplasmic Cot (VCA0261-0260) and CopG (VC2216) V. cholerae homologues.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.059345-0 
PMID: 22653946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Sep;153(Pt 9):2989-2997. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/006536-0.

Dissecting the Salmonella response to copper.

Espariz M(1), Checa SK(1), Audero MEP(1), Pontel LB(1), Soncini FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario, Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad
de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario,
Suipacha 531, S2002LRK-Rosario, Argentina.

Intracellular copper homeostasis in bacteria is maintained as the result of a
complex ensemble of cellular processes that in Escherichia coli involve the
coordinated action of two systems, cue and cus. In contrast, the pathogenic
bacterium Salmonella harbours only the cue regulon, including copA, which is
shown here to be transcriptionally controlled by CueR. Mutant strains in the
CueR-regulated genes were constructed to characterize the response of Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium to high concentrations of extracellular copper under
both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Unlike its counterpart in E. coli,
inactivation of cuiD displays the most severe phenotype and is also required for 
copper tolerance under anaerobic conditions. Deletion of copA has a mild effect
in aerobiosis, but strongly impairs survival in the absence of oxygen. In a
DeltacopA strain, a second Salmonella-specific P-type ATPase, GolT, can
substitute the copper transporter, diminishing the effect of its deletion. The
overall results highlight the importance of the cue system for controlling
intracellular copper stress. The observed differences between Salmonella and E.
coli in handling copper excess may contribute to our understanding of the
distinct capability of these related pathogenic bacteria to survive outside the
host.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/006536-0 
PMID: 17768242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cueR) AND (cusC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Apr;56(1):215-27.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli to external copper.

Yamamoto K(1), Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kinki University, Nakamachi 3327-204,
Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli upon exposure to external copper was
studied using DNA microarray and in vivo and in vitro transcription assays.
Transcription of three hitherto-identified copper-responsive genes, copA (copper 
efflux transporter), cueO (multicopper oxidase) and cusC (tripartite copper pump 
component) became maximum at 5 min after addition of copper sulphate, and
thereafter decreased to the preshift levels within 30 min. Microarray analysis at
5 min after addition of copper indicated that a total of at least 29 genes
including these three known genes were markedly and specifically affected (28
upregulated and one downregulated). Transcription of the divergent operons,
cusCFB and cusRS, was found to be activated by CusR, which bound to a CusR box
between the cusC and cusR promoters. Except for this site, the CusR box was not
identified in the entire E. coli genome. On the other hand, transcription of copA
and cueO was found to be activated by another copper-responsive factor CueR,
which bound to a conserved inverted repeat sequence, CueR box. A total of 197
CueR boxes were identified on the E. coli genome, including the CueR box
associated with the moa operon for molybdenum cofactor synthesis. At least 10
copper-induced genes were found to be under the control of CpxAR two-component
system, indicating that copper is one of the signals for activation of the CpxAR 
system. In addition, transcription of yedWV, a putative two-component system, was
activated by copper in CusR-dependent manner. Taken together we conclude that the
copper-responsive genes are organized into a hierarchy of the regulation network,
forming at least four regulons, i.e. CueR, CusR, CpxR and YedW regulons. These
copper-responsive regulons appear to sense and respond to different
concentrations of external copper.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04532.x 
PMID: 15773991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (carB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):317-28. doi:
10.1107/S1399004713027466. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Stealth carriers for low-resolution structure determination of membrane proteins 
in solution.

Maric S(1), Skar-Gislinge N(1), Midtgaard S(1), Thygesen MB(2), Schiller J(3),
Frielinghaus H(4), Moulin M(5), Haertlein M(5), Forsyth VT(5), Pomorski TG(6),
Arleth L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5,
2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)CARB Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen,
Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Institut für Medizinische Physik und Biophysik, Medizinische Fakultät,
Universität Leipzig, Härtelstrasse 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich Centre for Neutron Scattering, TUM
FRM-2, Lichtenbergstrasse 1, 85747 Garching, Germany.
(5)Life Sciences Group, Institut Laue-Langevin, 6 Rue Jules Horowitz, 38042
Grenoble, France.
(6)Center for Membrane Pumps in Cells and Disease, Department of Plant and
Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Thorvaldsensvej 40,
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

Structural studies of membrane proteins remain a great experimental challenge.
Functional reconstitution into artificial nanoscale bilayer disc carriers that
mimic the native bilayer environment allows the handling of membrane proteins in 
solution. This enables the use of small-angle scattering techniques for fast and 
reliable structural analysis. The difficulty with this approach is that the
carrier discs contribute to the measured scattering intensity in a highly
nontrivial fashion, making subsequent data analysis challenging. Here, an elegant
solution to circumvent the intrinsic complexity brought about by the presence of 
the carrier disc is presented. In combination with small-angle neutron scattering
(SANS) and the D2O/H2O-based solvent contrast-variation method, it is
demonstrated that it is possible to prepare specifically deuterated carriers that
become invisible to neutrons in 100% D2O at the length scales relevant to SANS.
These `stealth' carrier discs may be used as a general platform for
low-resolution structural studies of membrane proteins using well established
data-analysis tools originally developed for soluble proteins.

DOI: 10.1107/S1399004713027466 
PMID: 24531466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jul 2;454(1-2):1-6.

Efficient expression, purification and crystallisation of two hyperthermostable
enzymes of histidine biosynthesis.

Thoma R(1), Obmolova G, Lang DA, Schwander M, Jenö P, Sterner R, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Biophysikalische Chemie, Biozentrum der Universität Basel,
Switzerland.

Enzymes from hyperthermophiles can be efficiently purified after expression in
mesophilic hosts and are well-suited for crystallisation attempts. Two enzymes of
histidine biosynthesis from Thermotoga maritima,
N'-((5'-phosphoribosyl)-formimino)-5-aminoimidazol-4-carb oxamid ribonucleotide
isomerase and the cyclase moiety of imidazoleglycerol phosphate synthase, were
overexpressed in Escherichia coli, both in their native and
seleno-methionine-labelled forms, purified by heat precipitation of host proteins
and crystallised. N'-((5'-phosphoribosyl)-formimino)-5-aminoimidazol-4-carb
oxamid ribonucleotide isomerase crystallised in four different forms, all
suitable for X-ray structure solution, and the cyclase moiety of
imidazoleglycerol phosphate synthase yielded one crystal form that diffracted to 
atomic resolution. The obtained crystals will enable the determination of the
first three-dimensional structures of enzymes from the histidine biosynthetic
pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)00757-7 
PMID: 10413084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (folK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Planta Med. 1997 Dec;63(6):508-10.

Antibacterial activity of extracts and constituents of Pelargonium sidoides and
Pelargonium reniforme.

Kayser O(1), Kolodziej H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazie II, Pharmazeutische Biologie, Freie Universität Berlin,
Germany.

The antibacterial activity of extracts and isolated constituents (scopoletin,
umckalin, 5,6,7-trimethoxycoumarin, 6,8-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxycoumarin,
(+)-catechin, gallic acid and its methyl ester) of Pelargonium sidoides and
Pelargonium reniforme (Geraniaceae), plant species used in folk medicine by the
Southern African native population, was evaluated against 8 microorganisms,
including 3 Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and
beta-hemolytic Streptococcus 1451) and 5 Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Haemophilus influenzae). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) varied with the
preparation of the extracts and microorganisms tested, from about 0.6 mg/ml for
aqueous phases to over 10 mg/ml for crude Pelargonium extracts. With the
exception of the ineffective (+)-catechin, all the potentially active compounds
exhibited antibacterial activities with MICs of 200-1000 micrograms/ml. The
results provide for a rational basis of the traditional use of the titled
Pelargonium species.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-957752 
PMID: 9434601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (dksA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS One. 2011 May 6;6(5):e19235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235.

The E. coli anti-sigma factor Rsd: studies on the specificity and regulation of
its expression.

Hofmann N(1), Wurm R, Wagner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Among the seven different sigma factors in E. coli σ(70) has the
highest concentration and affinity for the core RNA polymerase. The E. coli
protein Rsd is regarded as an anti-sigma factor, inhibiting σ(70)-dependent
transcription at the onset of stationary growth. Although binding of Rsd to σ(70)
has been shown and numerous structural studies on Rsd have been performed the
detailed mechanism of action is still unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have performed studies to unravel the function
and regulation of Rsd expression in vitro and in vivo. Cross-linking and affinity
binding revealed that Rsd is able to interact with σ(70), with the core enzyme of
RNA polymerase and is able to form dimers in solution. Unexpectedly, we find that
Rsd does also interact with σ(38), the stationary phase-specific sigma factor.
This interaction was further corroborated by gel retardation and footprinting
studies with different promoter fragments and σ(38)- or σ(70)-containing RNA
polymerase in presence of Rsd. Under competitive in vitro transcription
conditions, in presence of both sigma factors, a selective inhibition of
σ(70)-dependent transcription was prevailing, however. Analysis of rsd expression
revealed that the nucleoid-associated proteins H-NS and FIS, StpA and LRP bind to
the regulatory region of the rsd promoters. Furthermore, the major promoter P2
was shown to be down-regulated in vivo by RpoS, the stationary phase-specific
sigma factor and the transcription factor DksA, while induction of the stringent 
control enhanced rsd promoter activity. Most notably, the dam-dependent
methylation of a cluster of GATC sites turned out to be important for efficient
rsd transcription.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results contribute to a better understanding of the
intricate mechanism of Rsd-mediated sigma factor specificity changes during
stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235 
PMCID: PMC3089606
PMID: 21573101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):365-77. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

Iron acquisition in the dental pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans:
what does it use as a source and how does it get this essential metal?

Rhodes ER(1), Menke S, Shoemaker C, Tomaras AP, McGillivary G, Actis LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Miami University, 40 Pearson Hall, Oxford, OH
45056, USA.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans requires iron to grow under limiting
conditions imposed by synthetic and natural chelators. Although none of the
strains tested used hemoglobin, lactoferrin or transferrin, all of them used
FeCl3 and hemin as iron sources under chelated conditions. Dot-blot binding
assays showed that all strains bind lactoferrin, hemoglobin, and hemin but not
transferrin. When compared with smooth strains, the rough isolates showed higher 
hemin binding activity, which was sensitive to proteinase K treatment. A.
actinomycetemcomitans harbors the Fur-regulated afeABCD locus coding for iron
acquisition in isogenic and non-isogenic cell backgrounds. The genome of this
oral pathogen also harbors several other predicted iron uptake genes including
the hitABC locus, which restored iron acquisition in the E. coli 1017 ent mutant.
However, the disruption of this locus in the parental strain did not affect iron 
acquisition as drastically as the inactivation of AfeABCD, suggesting that the
latter system could be more involved in iron transport than the HitABC system.
The genome of this oral pathogen also harbors an active copy of the exbBexbDtonB 
operon, which could provide the energy needed for hemin acquisition. However,
inactivation of each coding region of this operon did not affect the hemin and
iron acquisition phenotypes of isogenic derivatives. This observation suggests
that the function of these proteins could be replaced by those coded for by tolQ,
tolR and tolA as it was described for other bacterial transport systems.
Interruption of a hasR homolog, an actively transcribed gene that is predicted to
code for an outer membrane hemophore receptor protein, did not affect the ability
of an isogenic derivative to bind and use hemin under chelated conditions. This
result also indicates that A. actinomycetemcomitans could produce more than one
outer membrane hemin receptor as it was described in other human pathogens. All
strains tested formed biofilms on plastic under iron-rich and iron-chelated
conditions. However, smooth strains attached poorly and formed weaker biofilms
when compared with rough isolates. The incubation of rough cells in the presence 
of FeCl3 or hemin resulted in an increased number of smaller aggregates and
microcolonies as compared to the fewer but larger aggregates formed when cells
were grown in the presence of dipyridyl.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9058-3 
PMID: 17206384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(11):2836-41.

Effects of iron and temperature on expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tolQRA genes: role of the ferric uptake regulator.

Lafontaine ER(1), Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

The tolQRA genes have been recently identified in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO. In 
this study, we examined the effect of iron and temperature on tolQRA expression. 
A promoterless lacZ gene was introduced downstream of plasmid-encoded tolQ and
tolA, and expression was monitored by measuring beta-galactosidase activity of
cultures. Addition of 25 microM FeCl3 to the culture medium reduced tolQRA
expression by 50 to 60% in PAO but by only 25% in the fur mutant PAO A4. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that iron regulation occurs at the level of
transcription and involves the P. aeruginosa ferric uptake regulator (Fur).
Primer extension analysis was used to identify the proposed transcriptional start
site of tolA. Although a putative Fur box was identified 20 bp upstream of the
proposed start site, purified Fur did not bind to the tolA or tolQR promoter
regions in an in vitro gel retardation assay. Therefore, iron regulation of the
tol genes appears to involve an intermediate regulatory gene. Expression of tolQR
and tolA was optimal at 37 degrees C and was reduced by 40 to 50% when cultures
were grown at either 42 or 25 degreesC. Growth in high-iron medium at 25 degrees 
C further reduced tolQR and tolA expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.11.2836-2841.1998 
PMCID: PMC107246
PMID: 9603869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 30;93(9):4409-14.

Gene repression by the ferric uptake regulator in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: cycle
selection of iron-regulated genes.

Ochsner UA(1), Vasil ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Science Center,
Denver 80262, USA.

The expression of at least 24 distinct genes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 is
under direct control of the "ferric uptake regulator" (Fur). Novel targets of the
Fur protein were isolated in a powerful SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by
exponential enrichment)-like cycle selection consisting of in vitro DNA-Fur
interaction, binding to anti-Fur antibody, purification on protein G, and PCR
amplification. DNA fragments obtained after at least three exponential enrichment
cycles were cloned and subjected to DNA mobility-shift assays and DNase I
footprint analyses to verify the specific interaction with the Fur protein in
vitro. Iron-dependent expression of the corresponding genes in vivo was monitored
by RNase protection analysis. In total, 20 different DNA fragments were
identified which represent actual Pseudomonas iron-regulated genes (PIGs). While 
four PIGs are identical to already known genes (pfeR, pvdS, tonB, and fumC,
respectively), 16 PIGs represent previously unknown genes. Homology studies of
the putative proteins encoded by the PIGs allowed us to speculate about their
possible function. Two PIG products were highly similar to siderophore receptors 
from various species, and three PIG products were significantly homologous to
alternative sigma factors. Furthermore, homologs of the Escherichia coli
ORF1-tolQ, nuoA, stringent starvation protein Ssp, and of a two-component
regulatory system similar to the Pseudomonas syringae LemA sensor kinase were
identified. The putative gene products of seven additional PIGs did not show
significant homologies to any known proteins. The PIGs were mapped on the
P.aeruginosa chromosome. Their possible role in iron metabolism and virulence of 
P. aeruginosa is discussed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.9.4409 
PMCID: PMC39551
PMID: 8633080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):365-77. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

Iron acquisition in the dental pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans:
what does it use as a source and how does it get this essential metal?

Rhodes ER(1), Menke S, Shoemaker C, Tomaras AP, McGillivary G, Actis LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Miami University, 40 Pearson Hall, Oxford, OH
45056, USA.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans requires iron to grow under limiting
conditions imposed by synthetic and natural chelators. Although none of the
strains tested used hemoglobin, lactoferrin or transferrin, all of them used
FeCl3 and hemin as iron sources under chelated conditions. Dot-blot binding
assays showed that all strains bind lactoferrin, hemoglobin, and hemin but not
transferrin. When compared with smooth strains, the rough isolates showed higher 
hemin binding activity, which was sensitive to proteinase K treatment. A.
actinomycetemcomitans harbors the Fur-regulated afeABCD locus coding for iron
acquisition in isogenic and non-isogenic cell backgrounds. The genome of this
oral pathogen also harbors several other predicted iron uptake genes including
the hitABC locus, which restored iron acquisition in the E. coli 1017 ent mutant.
However, the disruption of this locus in the parental strain did not affect iron 
acquisition as drastically as the inactivation of AfeABCD, suggesting that the
latter system could be more involved in iron transport than the HitABC system.
The genome of this oral pathogen also harbors an active copy of the exbBexbDtonB 
operon, which could provide the energy needed for hemin acquisition. However,
inactivation of each coding region of this operon did not affect the hemin and
iron acquisition phenotypes of isogenic derivatives. This observation suggests
that the function of these proteins could be replaced by those coded for by tolQ,
tolR and tolA as it was described for other bacterial transport systems.
Interruption of a hasR homolog, an actively transcribed gene that is predicted to
code for an outer membrane hemophore receptor protein, did not affect the ability
of an isogenic derivative to bind and use hemin under chelated conditions. This
result also indicates that A. actinomycetemcomitans could produce more than one
outer membrane hemin receptor as it was described in other human pathogens. All
strains tested formed biofilms on plastic under iron-rich and iron-chelated
conditions. However, smooth strains attached poorly and formed weaker biofilms
when compared with rough isolates. The incubation of rough cells in the presence 
of FeCl3 or hemin resulted in an increased number of smaller aggregates and
microcolonies as compared to the fewer but larger aggregates formed when cells
were grown in the presence of dipyridyl.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9058-3 
PMID: 17206384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(11):2836-41.

Effects of iron and temperature on expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tolQRA genes: role of the ferric uptake regulator.

Lafontaine ER(1), Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

The tolQRA genes have been recently identified in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO. In 
this study, we examined the effect of iron and temperature on tolQRA expression. 
A promoterless lacZ gene was introduced downstream of plasmid-encoded tolQ and
tolA, and expression was monitored by measuring beta-galactosidase activity of
cultures. Addition of 25 microM FeCl3 to the culture medium reduced tolQRA
expression by 50 to 60% in PAO but by only 25% in the fur mutant PAO A4. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that iron regulation occurs at the level of
transcription and involves the P. aeruginosa ferric uptake regulator (Fur).
Primer extension analysis was used to identify the proposed transcriptional start
site of tolA. Although a putative Fur box was identified 20 bp upstream of the
proposed start site, purified Fur did not bind to the tolA or tolQR promoter
regions in an in vitro gel retardation assay. Therefore, iron regulation of the
tol genes appears to involve an intermediate regulatory gene. Expression of tolQR
and tolA was optimal at 37 degrees C and was reduced by 40 to 50% when cultures
were grown at either 42 or 25 degreesC. Growth in high-iron medium at 25 degrees 
C further reduced tolQR and tolA expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.11.2836-2841.1998 
PMCID: PMC107246
PMID: 9603869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (tolB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. N Biotechnol. 2008 Jun;25(1):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 May
16.

SRP and Sec pathway leader peptides for antibody phage display and antibody
fragment production in E. coli.

Thie H(1), Schirrmann T, Paschke M, Dübel S, Hust M.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Biochemie und
Biotechnologie, Abteilung Biotechnologie, Spielmannstr. 7, 38106 Braunschweig,
Germany.

Antibody phage display is a key technology for the generation of recombinant
(human) antibodies for research, diagnostics and therapy. Most antibody fragments
can only be folded correctly in the oxidizing environment of the periplasm of
Escherichia coli. A multitude of leader peptides has been used for secretion of
antibody::pIII fusion proteins into the periplasm, but a systematic study of
their impact on the performance of antibody phage display systems has not been
reported so far. In this work we have analysed the influence of various leader
peptides on antibody phage display efficiency and production yields of soluble
antibody fragments. Four leader peptides using the Sec pathway (PelB, OmpA, PhoA 
and pIII) and three using the SRP pathway (DsbA, TorT and TolB) were compared.
Both pathways are compatible with antibody phage display and the production of
soluble antibody fragments. The applicability of the SRP pathway to antibody
phage display and the production of functional scFvs is shown here for the first 
time.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbt.2008.01.001 
PMID: 18504019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (pal)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Oct;31(10):2793-804. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu223. Epub 2014
Jul 24.

Perturbation of iron homeostasis promotes the evolution of antibiotic resistance.

Méhi O(1), Bogos B(1), Csörgő B(1), Pál F(1), Nyerges A(1), Papp B(1), Pál C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary
pal.csaba@brc.mta.hu.

Evolution of antibiotic resistance in microbes is frequently achieved by
acquisition of spontaneous mutations during antimicrobial therapy. Here, we
demonstrate that inactivation of a central transcriptional regulator of iron
homeostasis (Fur) facilitates laboratory evolution of ciprofloxacin resistance in
Escherichia coli. To decipher the underlying molecular mechanisms, we first
performed a global transcriptome analysis and demonstrated that the set of genes 
regulated by Fur changes substantially in response to antibiotic treatment. We
hypothesized that the impact of Fur on evolvability under antibiotic pressure is 
due to the elevated intracellular concentration of free iron and the consequent
enhancement of oxidative damage-induced mutagenesis. In agreement with
expectations, overexpression of iron storage proteins, inhibition of iron
transport, or anaerobic conditions drastically suppressed the evolution of
resistance, whereas inhibition of the SOS response-mediated mutagenesis had only 
a minor effect. Finally, we provide evidence that a cell permeable iron chelator 
inhibits the evolution of resistance. In sum, our work revealed the central role 
of iron metabolism in the de novo evolution of antibiotic resistance, a pattern
that could influence the development of novel antimicrobial strategies.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu223 
PMCID: PMC4166929
PMID: 25063442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Plant Physiol. 2011 Jun 15;168(9):944-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2010.11.021.
Epub 2011 Feb 18.

4-Coumarate:CoA ligase family members from elicitor-treated Sorbus aucuparia cell
cultures.

Gaid MM(1), Scharnhop H, Ramadan H, Beuerle T, Beerhues L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig,
Mendelssohnstraße 1, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

Sorbus aucuparia cell cultures accumulate biphenyl and dibenzofuran phytoalexins 
in response to elicitor treatment. These polyketide derivatives arise from the
starter substrate benzoyl-CoA, the biosynthesis of which is largely unresolved.
Two CoA ligases involved are cinnamate:CoA ligase and benzoate:CoA ligase, which 
were assumed to be related in S. aucuparia to the ubiquitous 4-coumarate:CoA
ligase (4CL). cDNAs encoding three distinct 4CLs from elicitor-treated S.
aucuparia cell cultures were isolated using RT-PCR and RACE techniques and
functionally expressed in Escherichia coli as His(6)-tagged proteins (Sa4CL2 and 
Sa4CL3) or GST-fusion protein (Sa4CL1). All three isoenzymes preferred 4-coumaric
acid over cinnamic acid in spectrophotometric assays and failed to utilize
benzoic acid in radioisotopic assays. After elicitor treatment of S. aucuparia
cell cultures, the transcript levels of all three Sa4CLs increased but were
significantly lower than the maximum expression rates of the phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase (PAL) and biphenyl synthase 1 (BIS1) genes. The substrate
specificities and the expression profiles indicate that the three 4CL isoenzymes 
are not involved in benzoyl-CoA biosynthesis in S. aucuparia cell cultures.
Sa4CL3 and PAL transcripts also accumulated in response to light treatment.
Phylogenetically, Sa4CL1 and Sa4CL2 belong to the class I cluster and Sa4CL3
groups in the class II cluster. Sa4CL3 contains a 49-amino acid N-terminal
extension, which includes a chloroplast sorting signal.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2010.11.021 
PMID: 21330005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Planta. 2010 Aug;232(3):731-42. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1206-x. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Enzymes of phenylpropanoid metabolism in the important medicinal plant Melissa
officinalis L.

Weitzel C(1), Petersen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und Biotechnologie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Deutschhausstr 17A, 35037 Marburg, Germany.

Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, Lamiaceae) is a well-known medicinal plant.
Amongst the biologically active ingredients are a number of phenolic compounds,
the most prominent of which is rosmarinic acid. To obtain better knowledge of the
biosynthesis of these phenolic compounds, two enzymes of the general
phenylpropanoid pathway, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) and
4-coumarate:coenzyme A-ligase (4CL), were investigated in suspension cultures of 
lemon balm. MoPAL1 and Mo4CL1 cDNAs were cloned and heterologously expressed in
Escherichia coli and the enzymes characterised. Expression analysis of both genes
showed a correlation with the enzyme activities and rosmarinic acid content
during a cultivation period of the suspension culture. Southern-blot analysis
suggested the presence of most probably two gene copies in the M. officinalis
genome of both PAL and 4CL. The genomic DNA sequences of MoPAL1 and Mo4CL1 were
amplified and sequenced. MoPAL1 contains one phase 2 intron of 836 bp at a
conserved site, whilst Mo4CL1 was devoid of introns.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-010-1206-x 
PMID: 20563822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEMS Yeast Res. 2002 Aug;2(3):363-9.

High-level production and secretion of recombinant proteins by the dimorphic
yeast Arxula adeninivorans.

Wartmann T(1), Böer E, Pico AH, Sieber H, Bartelsen O, Gellissen G, Kunze G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, Corrensstr. 3,
D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

The non-conventional dimorphic thermo- and salt-resistant yeast Arxula
adeninivorans has been developed as a host for heterologous gene expression. For 
assessment of the system two model genes have been selected: the GFP gene
encoding the intracellular green fluorescent protein, and the HSA gene encoding
the secreted human serum albumin. The expression system includes two host
strains, namely A. adeninivorans LS3, which forms budding cells at 30 degrees C
and mycelia at >42 degrees C, and the strain A. adeninivorans 135, which forms
mycelia at temperatures as low as 30 degrees C. For expression control the
constitutive A. adeninivorans-derived TEF1-promoter and S. cerevisiae-derived
PHO5-terminator were selected. The basic A. adeninivorans
transformation/expression vector pAL-HPH1 is further equipped with the
Escherichia coli-derived hph gene conferring hygromycin B resistance and the 25S 
rDNA from A. adeninivorans for rDNA targeting. Transformants were obtained for
both budding cells and mycelia. In both cell types similar expression levels were
achieved and the GFP was localised in the cytoplasm while more than 95% of the
HSA accumulated in the culture medium. In initial fermentation trials on a 200-ml
shake flask scale maximal HSA product levels were observed after 96 h of
cultivation.

DOI: 10.1016/S1567-1356(02)00086-7 
PMID: 12702286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Feb;32(2):167-74.

Expression of ecdysteroid receptor and ultraspiracle from Chironomus tentans
(Insecta, Diptera) in E. coli and purification in a functional state.

Grebe M(1), Spindler-Barth M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Allgemeine Zoologie und Endokrinologie, Universität Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

Full length clones of ecdysteroid receptor (EcR) and Ultraspiracle (USP) from
Chironomus tentans were expressed as GST fusion proteins in E. coli and purified 
by affinity chromatography. The absence of detergents during the purification
procedure is essential for retaining receptor function, especially ligand
binding. Presence of USP is mandatory for ligand binding to EcR, but no other
cofactors or posttranslational modifications seem to be important, since
Scatchard plots revealed the same characteristics (two high affinity binding
sites for Ponasterone A with K(D1)=0.24+/-0.1nM and K(D2)=3.9+/-1.3.nM) as found 
in 0.4 M NaCl extracts of Chironomus cells. Gel mobility shift assays showed
binding of the heterodimer to PAL and DR5 even after removal of the GST-tag,
whereas EcR binding to PAL1 is GST-dependent. USP binds preferentially to DR5.
Addition of unprogrammed reticulocyte lysate improves ligand binding only
slightly. Removal of GST has no effect on (3)H-ponasterone A binding, but alters 
DNA binding characteristics. Calculation of specific binding (5.3+3.0 nmol/mg GST
EcR) revealed that 47+/-26% of purified receptor protein was able to bind ligand.
The addition of purified EcR to cell extracts of hormone resistant subclones of
the epithelial cell line from C. tentans, which have lost their ability to bind
ligand, restores specific binding of (3)H-ponasterone A.

DOI: 10.1016/s0965-1748(01)00098-4 
PMID: 11755059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(8):2425-30.

Cloning and characterization of the gene cluster for palatinose metabolism from
the phytopathogenic bacterium Erwinia rhapontici.

Börnke F(1), Hajirezaei M, Sonnewald U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, 06466 Gatersleben,
Germany.

Erwinia rhapontici is able to convert sucrose into isomaltulose (palatinose,
6-O-alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-D-fructose) and trehalulose
(1-O-alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-D-fructose) by the activity of a sucrose isomerase.
These sucrose isomers cannot be metabolized by plant cells and most other
organisms and therefore are possibly advantageous for the pathogen. This view is 
supported by the observation that in vitro yeast invertase activity can be
inhibited by palatinose, thus preventing sucrose consumption. Due to the lack of 
genetic information, the role of sucrose isomers in pathogenicity has not been
evaluated. Here we describe for the first time the cloning and characterization
of the palatinose (pal) genes from Erwinia rhapontici. To this end, a 15-kb
chromosomal DNA fragment containing nine complete open reading frames (ORFs) was 
cloned. The pal gene products of Erwinia rhapontici were shown to be homologous
to proteins involved in uptake and metabolism of various sugars from other
microorganisms. The palE, palF, palG, palH, palK, palQ, and palZ genes were
oriented divergently with respect to the palR and palI genes, and sequence
analysis suggested that the first set of genes constitutes an operon. Northern
blot analysis of RNA extracted from bacteria grown under various conditions
implies that the expression of the palI gene and the palEFGHKQZ genes is
oppositely regulated at the transcriptional level. Genes involved in palatinose
uptake and metabolism are down regulated by sucrose and activated by palatinose. 
Palatinose activation is inhibited by sucrose. Functional expression of palI and 
palQ in Escherichia coli revealed sucrose isomerase and palatinase activity,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.8.2425-2430.2001 
PMCID: PMC95157
PMID: 11274100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2000 Apr;182(8):2077-87.

RegA, iron, and growth phase regulate expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
tol-oprL gene cluster.

Duan K(1), Lafontaine ER, Majumdar S, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary
Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The tol-oprL region in Pseudomonas aeruginosa appears to be involved in pyocin
uptake and required for cell viability. The complete nucleotide sequences of the 
tolQRA and oprL genes as well as the incomplete sequences of tolB and orf2 have
been previously reported. In addition, the sequence of a P. aeruginosa
iron-regulated gene (pig6) has been described and found to share homology with an
open reading frame located upstream of the Escherichia coli tolQRA genes (U. A.
Ochsner and M. L. Vasil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:4409-4414, 1996). In this 
study, we cloned the remainder of the P. aeruginosa tol-oprL gene cluster and
determined its nucleotide sequence. This cluster was found to consist of seven
genes in the order orf1 tolQ tolR tolA tolB oprL orf2. Transcriptional analysis
of this gene cluster was performed by detecting the presence of mRNAs spanning
adjacent genes as well as by using a promoterless lacZ reporter gene fused to
each of the seven genes contained in the tol-oprL locus. The results show that
there are three major transcriptional units or operons in this region,
orf1-tolQRA, tolB, and oprL-orf2, in contrast to the E. coli tol-pal region,
where there are only two operons, orf1-tolQRA and tolB-pal-orf2. Analysis of gene
expression indicated that the tol-oprL genes of P. aeruginosa are both iron and
growth phase modulated. The first operon, orf1-tolQRA, is iron regulated
throughout growth, but iron-regulated expression of tolB and oprL fusions occurs 
only in late log phase. The expression of the three operons was significantly
less repressed by iron in fur mutants than in the wild-type strain, suggesting
the involvement of Fur in the iron regulation of all three operons. RegA is a
positive yet nonessential regulator of tol-oprL expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.8.2077-2087.2000 
PMCID: PMC111254
PMID: 10735848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):491-9.

Structural and catalytic properties of the four phenylalanine ammonia-lyase
isoenzymes from parsley (Petroselinum crispum Nym.).

Appert C(1), Logemann E, Hahlbrock K, Schmid J, Amrhein N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pflanzenwissenschaften, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule
Zürich, Switzerland.

Near-full-length cDNAs for the four phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) isoenzymes 
in parsley (Petroselium crispum Nym.) were cloned and the complete amino acid
sequences deduced. Fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase were expressed 
in Escherichia coli, purified and cleaved. All of the resulting phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase proteins, as well as the fusion proteins, were catalytically
active. The turnover number of one selected isoenzyme, PAL-1, was estimated to be
around 22 s-1 for each active site. In contrast to a certain degree of
differential expression in various parts of parsley plants, the four
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase isoenzymes exhibited very similar apparent Km values 
for L-phenylalanine (15-24.5 microM) as well as identical temperature (58 degrees
C) and pH (8.5) optima. All of them were competitively inhibited by (E)-cinnamate
with similar efficiency (Ki values: 9.1-21.5 microM), lacked cooperative
behaviour, and accepted L-tyrosine as a substrate with low affinity (Km values:
2.6-7.8 mM). These results suggest that the occurrence of multiple gene copies
has a function other than encoding isoenzymes with different enzyme kinetic
properties.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.00491.x 
PMID: 7925471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Infect Immun. 1991 Aug;59(8):2515-21.

Cloning, genetic analysis, and nucleotide sequence of a determinant coding for a 
19-kilodalton peptidoglycan-associated protein (Ppl) of Legionella pneumophila.

Ludwig B(1), Schmid A, Marre R, Hacker J.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

A genomic library of Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires 
disease in humans, was constructed in Escherichia coli K-12, and the recombinant 
clones were screened by immuno-colony blots with an antiserum raised against
heat-killed L. pneumophila. Twenty-three clones coding for a Legionella-specific 
protein of 19 kDa were isolated. The 19-kDa protein, which represents an outer
membrane protein, was found to be associated with the peptidoglycan layer both in
L. pneumophila and in the recombinant E. coli clones. This was shown by
electrophoresis and Western immunoblot analysis of bacterial cell membrane
fractions with a monospecific polyclonal 19-kDa protein-specific antiserum. The
protein was termed peptidoglycan-associated protein of L. pneumophila (Ppl). The 
corresponding genetic determinant, ppl, was subcloned on a 1.8-kb ClaI fragment. 
DNA sequence studies revealed that two open reading frames, pplA and pplB, coding
for putative proteins of 18.9 and 16.8 kDa, respectively, were located on the
ClaI fragment. Exonuclease III digestion studies confirmed that pplA is the gene 
coding for the peptidoglycan-associated 19-kDa protein of L. pneumophila. The
amino acid sequence of PplA exhibits a high degree of homology to the sequences
of the Pal lipoproteins of E. coli K-12 and Haemophilus influenzae.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.59.8.2515-2521.1991 
PMCID: PMC258049
PMID: 1855972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS Lett. 1989 Dec 4;258(2):335-8.

Expression in Escherichia coli of catalytically active phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase from parsley.

Schulz W(1), Eiben HG, Hahlbrock K.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Abteilung Biochemie, Kln, FRG.

In parsley (Petroselinum crispum), phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) is encoded
by 4 structurally similar genes. The nucleotide sequence of a near full-length
cDNA and the deduced amino acid sequence of PAL-4 are presented and compared with
the corresponding sequences of PAL-1, a previously described representative of
the gene family. Transformation of Escherichia coli cells with PAL-1 or PAL-4
cDNA yielded catalytically active PAL, suggesting that the catalytic center of
the enzyme is formed spontaneously rather than by a plant-specific mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(89)81687-4 
PMID: 2689222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (modA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Gene Expr. 1999;8(3):187-96.

Overexpression, purification, and partial characterization of
ADP-ribosyltransferases modA and modB of bacteriophage T4.

Tiemann B(1), Depping R, Rüger W.

Author information: 
(1)Arbeitsgruppe Molekulare Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Ruhr-Universität
Bochum, Germany.

There is increasing experimental evidence that ADP-ribosylation of host proteins 
is an important means to regulate gene expression of bacteriophage T4.
Surprisingly, this phage codes for three different ADP-ribosyltransferases, gene 
products Alt, ModA, and ModB, modifying partially overlapping sets of host
proteins. While gene product Alt already has been isolated as a recombinant
protein and its action on host RNA polymerases and transcription regulation have 
been studied, the nucleotide sequences of the two mod genes was published only
recently. Their mode of action in the course of the infection cycle and the
consequences of the ADP-ribosylations catalyzed by these enzymes remain to be
investigated. Here we describe the cloning of the genes, the overexpression,
purification, and partial characterization of ADP-ribosyltransferases ModA and
ModB. Both proteins seem to act independently, and the ADP-ribosyl moieties are
transferred to different sets of host proteins. While gene product ModA,
similarly to the Alt protein, acts also on the alpha-subunit of host RNA
polymerase, the ModB activity serves another set of proteins, one of which was
identified as the S1 protein associated with the 30S subunit of the E. coli
ribosomes.


PMCID: PMC6157369
PMID: 10634320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1999 Oct;181(19):5930-9.

Activity of the molybdopterin-containing xanthine dehydrogenase of Rhodobacter
capsulatus can be restored by high molybdenum concentrations in a moeA mutant
defective in molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis.

Leimkühler S(1), Angermüller S, Schwarz G, Mendel RR, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Fakultät für Biologie, Lehrstuhl für Biologie der
Mikroorganismen, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

During the screening for Rhodobacter capsulatus mutants defective in xanthine
degradation, one Tn5 mutant which was able to grow with xanthine as a sole
nitrogen source only in the presence of high molybdate concentrations (1 mM), a
phenotype resembling Escherichia coli mogA mutants, was identified. Unexpectedly,
the corresponding Tn5 insertion was located within the moeA gene. Partial DNA
sequence analysis and interposon mutagenesis of regions flanking R. capsulatus
moeA revealed that no further genes essential for molybdopterin biosynthesis are 
located in the vicinity of moeA and revealed that moeA forms a monocistronic
transcriptional unit in R. capsulatus. Amino acid sequence alignments of R.
capsulatus MoeA (414 amino acids [aa]) with E. coli MogA (195 aa) showed that
MoeA contains an internal domain homologous to MogA, suggesting similar functions
of these proteins in the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor. Interposon
mutants defective in moeA did not exhibit dimethyl sulfoxide reductase or nitrate
reductase activity, which both require the molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide
(MGD) cofactor, even after addition of 1 mM molybdate to the medium. In contrast,
the activity of xanthine dehydrogenase, which binds the molybdopterin (MPT)
cofactor, was restored to wild-type levels after the addition of 1 mM molybdate
to the growth medium. Analysis of fluorescent derivatives of the molybdenum
cofactor of purified xanthine dehydrogenase isolated from moeA and modA mutant
strains, respectively, revealed that MPT is inserted into the enzyme only after
molybdenum chelation, and both metal chelation and Mo-MPT insertion can occur
only under high molybdate concentrations in the absence of MoeA. These data
support a model for the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor in which the
biosynthesis of MPT and MGD are split at a stage when the molybdenum atom is
added to MPT.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.19.5930-5939.1999 
PMCID: PMC103619
PMID: 10498704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;250(2):524-31.

Molybdate-uptake genes and molybdopterin-biosynthesis genes on a bacterial
plasmid--characterization of MoeA as a filament-forming protein with
adenosinetriphosphatase activity.

Menéndez C(1), Otto A, Igloi G, Nick P, Brandsch R, Schubach B, Böttcher B,
Brandsch R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

A gene cluster consisting of homologs to Escherichia coli moaA, moeA, moaC and
moaE, which encode enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of molybdopterin cofactor
(MoCo), and to modA, modB and modC, which encode a high-affinity molybdate
transporter, were identified on pAO1 of Arthrobacter nicotinovorans near genes of
molybdopterin-dependent enzymes involved in nicotine degradation. This gene
arrangement suggests a coordinated expression of the MoCo-dependent and the
MoCo-biosynthesis genes and shows that catabolic plasmids may carry the transport
and biosynthetic machinery for the synthesis of the cofactors needed for the
functioning of the enzymes they encode. pAO1 MoeA functionally complemented E.
coli moeA mutants. The overexpressed and purified protein, of molecular mass
44,500 Da, associated into high-molecular-mass complexes and spontaneously formed
gels at concentrations above 1 mg/ml. Transmission electron microscopy and atomic
force microscopy revealed that MoeA forms fibrilar structures. In the presence of
Mg2+ MoeA exhibited ATPase activity (0.020 pmol ATP x pmol protein(-1) x
min(-1)). ATP, ADP or AMP induced the disassembly of the MoeA fibers into
aggregates. pAO1 MoeA shows 39% identity to the C-terminal domain of the rat
neuroprotein gephyrin. Like gephyrin it binds to neurotubulin, but binds with
preference to tubulin dimers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.0524a.x 
PMID: 9428706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiol Res. 1995 Nov;150(4):347-61.

Molecular analysis of the molybdate uptake operon, modABCD, of Escherichia coli
and modR, a regulatory gene.

Walkenhorst HM(1), Hemschemeier SK, Eichenlaub R.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl Gentechnologie/Mikrobiologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität
Bielefeld, Germany.

The nucleotide sequence of a 6.8-kb chromosomal subfragment of plasmid pHW100
complementing an Escherichia coli modC (chlD) mutant has been determined. This
DNA region encodes the genes of a high-affinity uptake system for molybdate
arranged in an operon with the genes modABCD. Since the modA product has a signal
peptide at the N-terminus it probably is the periplasmic binding-protein for
molybdate. The products of modB (chlJ) and modC (chlD) have been described
earlier as the inner membrane protein and the ATP-binding protein of the
molybdate transport system, respectively. At present, there is no information on 
possible functions of the fourth gene of the operon, modD. Upstream of the mod
operon, two other gene loci, termed modR and an open reading frame ORF6 could be 
identified. ModR shares homology with a molybdenum-pterin binding protein of
Clostridium pasteurianum. ORF6 has extensive homology to ModC and other
nucleotide-binding proteins of E. coli. Insertional inactivation of modR and ORF6
using a gentamicin resistance gene cartridge has no effect on molybdoenzyme
activities, indicating that none of the two gene products is essential for
molybdate uptake or molybdenum cofactor synthesis. However, by using a plasmid
carrying a modA-lacZ gene fusion we observed that inactivation of modR releases
repression of the mod operon independent of the molybdate concentration in the
medium. This indicates that modR is a component of the mod operon regulation or
the repressor itself.

DOI: 10.1016/S0944-5013(11)80016-9 
PMID: 8564363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 1993 May;175(10):3031-42.

Characterization of Rhodobacter capsulatus genes encoding a molybdenum transport 
system and putative molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins.

Wang G(1), Angermüller S, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

The alternative, heterometal-free nitrogenase of Rhodobacter capsulatus is
repressed by traces of molybdenum in the medium. Strains carrying mutations
located downstream of nifB copy II were able to express the alternative
nitrogenase even in the presence of high molybdate concentrations. DNA sequence
analysis of a 5.5-kb fragment of this region revealed six open reading frames,
designated modABCD, mopA, and mopB. The gene products of modB and modC are
homologous to ChlJ and ChlD of Escherichia coli and represent an integral
membrane protein and an ATP-binding protein typical of high-affinity transport
systems, respectively. ModA and ModD exhibited no homology to known proteins, but
a leader peptide characteristic of proteins cleaved during export to the
periplasm is present in ModA, indicating that ModA might be a periplasmic
molybdate-binding protein. The MopA and MopB proteins showed a high degree of
amino acid sequence homology to each other. Both proteins contained a tandem
repeat of a domain encompassing 70 amino acid residues, which had significant
sequence similarity to low-molecular-weight molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins
from Clostridium pasteurianum. Compared with that for the parental nifHDK
deletion strain, the molybdenum concentrations necessary to repress the
alternative nitrogenase were increased 4-fold in a modD mutant and 500-fold in
modA, modB, and modC mutants. No significant inhibition of the heterometal-free
nitrogenase by molybdate was observed for mopA mopB double mutants. The uptake of
molybdenum by mod and mop mutants was estimated by measuring the activity of the 
conventional molybdenum-containing nitrogenase. Molybdenum transport was not
affected in a mopA mopB double mutant, whereas strains carrying lesions in the
binding-protein-dependent transport system were impaired in molybdenum uptake.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.10.3031-3042.1993 
PMCID: PMC204623
PMID: 8491722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (modB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Gene Expr. 1999;8(3):187-96.

Overexpression, purification, and partial characterization of
ADP-ribosyltransferases modA and modB of bacteriophage T4.

Tiemann B(1), Depping R, Rüger W.

Author information: 
(1)Arbeitsgruppe Molekulare Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Ruhr-Universität
Bochum, Germany.

There is increasing experimental evidence that ADP-ribosylation of host proteins 
is an important means to regulate gene expression of bacteriophage T4.
Surprisingly, this phage codes for three different ADP-ribosyltransferases, gene 
products Alt, ModA, and ModB, modifying partially overlapping sets of host
proteins. While gene product Alt already has been isolated as a recombinant
protein and its action on host RNA polymerases and transcription regulation have 
been studied, the nucleotide sequences of the two mod genes was published only
recently. Their mode of action in the course of the infection cycle and the
consequences of the ADP-ribosylations catalyzed by these enzymes remain to be
investigated. Here we describe the cloning of the genes, the overexpression,
purification, and partial characterization of ADP-ribosyltransferases ModA and
ModB. Both proteins seem to act independently, and the ADP-ribosyl moieties are
transferred to different sets of host proteins. While gene product ModA,
similarly to the Alt protein, acts also on the alpha-subunit of host RNA
polymerase, the ModB activity serves another set of proteins, one of which was
identified as the S1 protein associated with the 30S subunit of the E. coli
ribosomes.


PMCID: PMC6157369
PMID: 10634320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;250(2):524-31.

Molybdate-uptake genes and molybdopterin-biosynthesis genes on a bacterial
plasmid--characterization of MoeA as a filament-forming protein with
adenosinetriphosphatase activity.

Menéndez C(1), Otto A, Igloi G, Nick P, Brandsch R, Schubach B, Böttcher B,
Brandsch R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

A gene cluster consisting of homologs to Escherichia coli moaA, moeA, moaC and
moaE, which encode enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of molybdopterin cofactor
(MoCo), and to modA, modB and modC, which encode a high-affinity molybdate
transporter, were identified on pAO1 of Arthrobacter nicotinovorans near genes of
molybdopterin-dependent enzymes involved in nicotine degradation. This gene
arrangement suggests a coordinated expression of the MoCo-dependent and the
MoCo-biosynthesis genes and shows that catabolic plasmids may carry the transport
and biosynthetic machinery for the synthesis of the cofactors needed for the
functioning of the enzymes they encode. pAO1 MoeA functionally complemented E.
coli moeA mutants. The overexpressed and purified protein, of molecular mass
44,500 Da, associated into high-molecular-mass complexes and spontaneously formed
gels at concentrations above 1 mg/ml. Transmission electron microscopy and atomic
force microscopy revealed that MoeA forms fibrilar structures. In the presence of
Mg2+ MoeA exhibited ATPase activity (0.020 pmol ATP x pmol protein(-1) x
min(-1)). ATP, ADP or AMP induced the disassembly of the MoeA fibers into
aggregates. pAO1 MoeA shows 39% identity to the C-terminal domain of the rat
neuroprotein gephyrin. Like gephyrin it binds to neurotubulin, but binds with
preference to tubulin dimers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.0524a.x 
PMID: 9428706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiol Res. 1995 Nov;150(4):347-61.

Molecular analysis of the molybdate uptake operon, modABCD, of Escherichia coli
and modR, a regulatory gene.

Walkenhorst HM(1), Hemschemeier SK, Eichenlaub R.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl Gentechnologie/Mikrobiologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität
Bielefeld, Germany.

The nucleotide sequence of a 6.8-kb chromosomal subfragment of plasmid pHW100
complementing an Escherichia coli modC (chlD) mutant has been determined. This
DNA region encodes the genes of a high-affinity uptake system for molybdate
arranged in an operon with the genes modABCD. Since the modA product has a signal
peptide at the N-terminus it probably is the periplasmic binding-protein for
molybdate. The products of modB (chlJ) and modC (chlD) have been described
earlier as the inner membrane protein and the ATP-binding protein of the
molybdate transport system, respectively. At present, there is no information on 
possible functions of the fourth gene of the operon, modD. Upstream of the mod
operon, two other gene loci, termed modR and an open reading frame ORF6 could be 
identified. ModR shares homology with a molybdenum-pterin binding protein of
Clostridium pasteurianum. ORF6 has extensive homology to ModC and other
nucleotide-binding proteins of E. coli. Insertional inactivation of modR and ORF6
using a gentamicin resistance gene cartridge has no effect on molybdoenzyme
activities, indicating that none of the two gene products is essential for
molybdate uptake or molybdenum cofactor synthesis. However, by using a plasmid
carrying a modA-lacZ gene fusion we observed that inactivation of modR releases
repression of the mod operon independent of the molybdate concentration in the
medium. This indicates that modR is a component of the mod operon regulation or
the repressor itself.

DOI: 10.1016/S0944-5013(11)80016-9 
PMID: 8564363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1993 May;175(10):3031-42.

Characterization of Rhodobacter capsulatus genes encoding a molybdenum transport 
system and putative molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins.

Wang G(1), Angermüller S, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

The alternative, heterometal-free nitrogenase of Rhodobacter capsulatus is
repressed by traces of molybdenum in the medium. Strains carrying mutations
located downstream of nifB copy II were able to express the alternative
nitrogenase even in the presence of high molybdate concentrations. DNA sequence
analysis of a 5.5-kb fragment of this region revealed six open reading frames,
designated modABCD, mopA, and mopB. The gene products of modB and modC are
homologous to ChlJ and ChlD of Escherichia coli and represent an integral
membrane protein and an ATP-binding protein typical of high-affinity transport
systems, respectively. ModA and ModD exhibited no homology to known proteins, but
a leader peptide characteristic of proteins cleaved during export to the
periplasm is present in ModA, indicating that ModA might be a periplasmic
molybdate-binding protein. The MopA and MopB proteins showed a high degree of
amino acid sequence homology to each other. Both proteins contained a tandem
repeat of a domain encompassing 70 amino acid residues, which had significant
sequence similarity to low-molecular-weight molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins
from Clostridium pasteurianum. Compared with that for the parental nifHDK
deletion strain, the molybdenum concentrations necessary to repress the
alternative nitrogenase were increased 4-fold in a modD mutant and 500-fold in
modA, modB, and modC mutants. No significant inhibition of the heterometal-free
nitrogenase by molybdate was observed for mopA mopB double mutants. The uptake of
molybdenum by mod and mop mutants was estimated by measuring the activity of the 
conventional molybdenum-containing nitrogenase. Molybdenum transport was not
affected in a mopA mopB double mutant, whereas strains carrying lesions in the
binding-protein-dependent transport system were impaired in molybdenum uptake.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.10.3031-3042.1993 
PMCID: PMC204623
PMID: 8491722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (modC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;250(2):524-31.

Molybdate-uptake genes and molybdopterin-biosynthesis genes on a bacterial
plasmid--characterization of MoeA as a filament-forming protein with
adenosinetriphosphatase activity.

Menéndez C(1), Otto A, Igloi G, Nick P, Brandsch R, Schubach B, Böttcher B,
Brandsch R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

A gene cluster consisting of homologs to Escherichia coli moaA, moeA, moaC and
moaE, which encode enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of molybdopterin cofactor
(MoCo), and to modA, modB and modC, which encode a high-affinity molybdate
transporter, were identified on pAO1 of Arthrobacter nicotinovorans near genes of
molybdopterin-dependent enzymes involved in nicotine degradation. This gene
arrangement suggests a coordinated expression of the MoCo-dependent and the
MoCo-biosynthesis genes and shows that catabolic plasmids may carry the transport
and biosynthetic machinery for the synthesis of the cofactors needed for the
functioning of the enzymes they encode. pAO1 MoeA functionally complemented E.
coli moeA mutants. The overexpressed and purified protein, of molecular mass
44,500 Da, associated into high-molecular-mass complexes and spontaneously formed
gels at concentrations above 1 mg/ml. Transmission electron microscopy and atomic
force microscopy revealed that MoeA forms fibrilar structures. In the presence of
Mg2+ MoeA exhibited ATPase activity (0.020 pmol ATP x pmol protein(-1) x
min(-1)). ATP, ADP or AMP induced the disassembly of the MoeA fibers into
aggregates. pAO1 MoeA shows 39% identity to the C-terminal domain of the rat
neuroprotein gephyrin. Like gephyrin it binds to neurotubulin, but binds with
preference to tubulin dimers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.0524a.x 
PMID: 9428706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiol Res. 1995 Nov;150(4):347-61.

Molecular analysis of the molybdate uptake operon, modABCD, of Escherichia coli
and modR, a regulatory gene.

Walkenhorst HM(1), Hemschemeier SK, Eichenlaub R.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl Gentechnologie/Mikrobiologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität
Bielefeld, Germany.

The nucleotide sequence of a 6.8-kb chromosomal subfragment of plasmid pHW100
complementing an Escherichia coli modC (chlD) mutant has been determined. This
DNA region encodes the genes of a high-affinity uptake system for molybdate
arranged in an operon with the genes modABCD. Since the modA product has a signal
peptide at the N-terminus it probably is the periplasmic binding-protein for
molybdate. The products of modB (chlJ) and modC (chlD) have been described
earlier as the inner membrane protein and the ATP-binding protein of the
molybdate transport system, respectively. At present, there is no information on 
possible functions of the fourth gene of the operon, modD. Upstream of the mod
operon, two other gene loci, termed modR and an open reading frame ORF6 could be 
identified. ModR shares homology with a molybdenum-pterin binding protein of
Clostridium pasteurianum. ORF6 has extensive homology to ModC and other
nucleotide-binding proteins of E. coli. Insertional inactivation of modR and ORF6
using a gentamicin resistance gene cartridge has no effect on molybdoenzyme
activities, indicating that none of the two gene products is essential for
molybdate uptake or molybdenum cofactor synthesis. However, by using a plasmid
carrying a modA-lacZ gene fusion we observed that inactivation of modR releases
repression of the mod operon independent of the molybdate concentration in the
medium. This indicates that modR is a component of the mod operon regulation or
the repressor itself.

DOI: 10.1016/S0944-5013(11)80016-9 
PMID: 8564363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 1993 May;175(10):3031-42.

Characterization of Rhodobacter capsulatus genes encoding a molybdenum transport 
system and putative molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins.

Wang G(1), Angermüller S, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

The alternative, heterometal-free nitrogenase of Rhodobacter capsulatus is
repressed by traces of molybdenum in the medium. Strains carrying mutations
located downstream of nifB copy II were able to express the alternative
nitrogenase even in the presence of high molybdate concentrations. DNA sequence
analysis of a 5.5-kb fragment of this region revealed six open reading frames,
designated modABCD, mopA, and mopB. The gene products of modB and modC are
homologous to ChlJ and ChlD of Escherichia coli and represent an integral
membrane protein and an ATP-binding protein typical of high-affinity transport
systems, respectively. ModA and ModD exhibited no homology to known proteins, but
a leader peptide characteristic of proteins cleaved during export to the
periplasm is present in ModA, indicating that ModA might be a periplasmic
molybdate-binding protein. The MopA and MopB proteins showed a high degree of
amino acid sequence homology to each other. Both proteins contained a tandem
repeat of a domain encompassing 70 amino acid residues, which had significant
sequence similarity to low-molecular-weight molybdenum-pterin-binding proteins
from Clostridium pasteurianum. Compared with that for the parental nifHDK
deletion strain, the molybdenum concentrations necessary to repress the
alternative nitrogenase were increased 4-fold in a modD mutant and 500-fold in
modA, modB, and modC mutants. No significant inhibition of the heterometal-free
nitrogenase by molybdate was observed for mopA mopB double mutants. The uptake of
molybdenum by mod and mop mutants was estimated by measuring the activity of the 
conventional molybdenum-containing nitrogenase. Molybdenum transport was not
affected in a mopA mopB double mutant, whereas strains carrying lesions in the
binding-protein-dependent transport system were impaired in molybdenum uptake.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.10.3031-3042.1993 
PMCID: PMC204623
PMID: 8491722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (trxB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jan;185(1):115-25.

Global role for ClpP-containing proteases in stationary-phase adaptation of
Escherichia coli.

Weichart D(1), Querfurth N, Dreger M, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 12-16, 14195 Berlin, Germany. weichart@zedat.fu-berlin.de

To elucidate the involvement of proteolysis in the regulation of stationary-phase
adaptation, the clpA, clpX, and clpP protease mutants of Escherichia coli were
subjected to proteome analysis during growth and during carbon starvation. For
most of the growth-phase-regulated proteins detected on our gels, the clpA, clpX,
or clpP mutant failed to mount the growth-phase regulation found in the wild
type. For example, in the clpP and clpA mutant cultures, the Dps protein, the
WrbA protein, and the periplasmic lysine-arginine-ornithine binding protein ArgT 
did not display the induction typical for late-stationary-phase wild-type cells. 
On the other hand, in the protease mutants, a number of proteins accumulated to a
higher degree than in the wild type, especially in late stationary phase. The
proteins affected in this manner include the LeuA, TrxB, GdhA, GlnA, and MetK
proteins and alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (AhpC). These proteins may be directly
degraded by ClpAP or ClpXP, respectively, or their expression could be modulated 
by a protease-dependent mechanism. From our data we conclude that the levels of
most major growth-phase-regulated proteins in E. coli are at some point
controlled by the activity of at least one of the ClpP, ClpA, and ClpX proteins. 
Cultures of the strains lacking functional ClpP or ClpX also displayed a more
rapid loss of viability during extended stationary phase than the wild type.
Therefore, regulation by proteolysis seems to be more important, especially in
resting cells, than previously suspected.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.1.115-125.2003 
PMCID: PMC141834
PMID: 12486047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Protein Expr Purif. 2001 Jun;22(1):108-12.

Accurate disulfide formation in Escherichia coli: overexpression and
characterization of the first domain (HF6478) of the multiple Kazal-type
inhibitor LEKTI.

Lauber T(1), Marx UC, Schulz A, Kreutzmann P, Rösch P, Hoffmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biopolymere, Universität Bayreuth, Universitätstrasse 30, 95447 
Bayreuth, Germany.

The human hemofiltrate peptide HF6478, a putative serine proteinase inhibitor,
which is part of the precursor protein LEKTI, was cloned, overexpressed, and
purified. HF6478 contains two disulfide bridges with 1-4, 2-3 connectivity,
sharing partial homology to Kazal-type domains and other serine proteinase
inhibitors. It was expressed as thioredoxin (Trx) fusion protein, and disulfide
formation occurred in the oxidative cytoplasm of Escherichia coli Origami (DE3)
strain which carries a trxB(-)/gor522(-) double mutation. The soluble fusion
protein was purified using metal-chelating affinity chromatography. Cleavage of
the Trx fusion protein with factor Xa and subsequent purification yielded the
final product in amounts sufficient for structural studies. Characterization of
recombinant HF6478 was done by amino acid sequencing, mass spectrometry,
capillary zone electrophoresis, and CD spectroscopy. Taking the blood filtrate
peptide HF6478 as example, we present a strategy which should facilitate the
expression of different extracellular proteins in the E. coli cytoplasm.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.2001.1415 
PMID: 11388807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Immun. 2001 Jun;69(6):3744-54.

PerR controls oxidative stress resistance and iron storage proteins and is
required for virulence in Staphylococcus aureus.

Horsburgh MJ(1), Clements MO, Crossley H, Ingham E, Foster SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, England.

The Staphylococcus aureus genome encodes three ferric uptake regulator (Fur)
homologues: Fur, PerR, and Zur. To determine the exact role of PerR, we
inactivated the gene by allelic replacement using a kanamycin cassette, creating 
strain MJH001 (perR). PerR was found to control transcription of the genes
encoding the oxidative stress resistance proteins catalase (KatA), alkyl
hydroperoxide reductase (AhpCF), bacterioferritin comigratory protein (Bcp), and 
thioredoxin reductase (TrxB). Furthermore, PerR regulates transcription of the
genes encoding the iron storage proteins ferritin (Ftn) and the ferritin-like Dps
homologue, MrgA. Transcription of perR was autoregulated, and PerR repressed
transcription of the iron homeostasis regulator Fur, which is a positive
regulator of catalase expression. PerR functions as a manganese-dependent,
transcriptional repressor of the identified regulon. Elevated iron concentrations
produced induction of the PerR regulon. PerR may act as a peroxide sensor, since 
addition of external hydrogen peroxide to 8325-4 (wild type) resulted in
increased transcription of most of the PerR regulon, except for fur and perR
itself. The PerR-regulated katA gene encodes the sole catalase of S. aureus,
which is an important starvation survival determinant but is surprisingly not
required for pathogenicity in a murine skin abscess model of infection. In
contrast, PerR is not necessary for starvation survival but is required for full 
virulence (P < 0.005) in this model of infection. PerR of S. aureus may act as a 
redox sentinel protein during infection, analogous to the in vitro activities of 
OxyR and PerR of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, respectively. However,
it differs in its response to the metal balance within the cell and has the added
capability of regulating iron uptake and storage.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.6.3744-3754.2001 
PMCID: PMC98383
PMID: 11349039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arch Microbiol. 1997 Oct;168(4):328-37.

Two closely linked genes encoding thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase in
Clostridium litorale.

Kreimer S(1), Söhling B, Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle,
Kurt-Mothes-Strasse 3, D-06099 Halle, Germany.

The genes encoding thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase of Clostridium litorale 
were cloned and sequenced. The thioredoxin reductase gene (trxB) encoded a
protein of 33.9 kDa, and the deduced amino acid sequence showed 44% identity to
the corresponding protein from Escherichia coli. The gene encoding thioredoxin
(trxA) was located immediately downstream of trxB. TrxA and TrxB were each
encoded by two gene copies, both copies presumably located on the chromosome.
Like other thioredoxins from anaerobic, amino-acid-degrading bacteria
investigated to date by N-terminal amino acid sequencing, thioredoxin from C.
litorale exhibited characteristic deviations from the consensus sequence, e.g.,
GCVPC instead of WCGPC at the redox-active center. Using heterologous enzyme
assays, neither thioredoxin nor thioredoxin reductase were interchangeable with
the corresponding proteins of the thioredoxin system from E. coli. To elucidate
the molecular basis of that incompatibility, Gly-31 in C. litorale thioredoxin
was substituted with Trp (the W in the consensus sequence) by site-directed
mutagenesis. The mutant protein was expressed in E. coli and was purified to
homogeneity. Enzyme assays using the G31W thioredoxin revealed that Gly-31 was
not responsible for the observed incompatibility with the E. coli thioredoxin
reductase, but it was essential for activity of the thioredoxin system in C.
litorale.

DOI: 10.1007/s002030050506 
PMID: 9297471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Nov 15;234(1):192-9.

Glycine reductase of Clostridium litorale. Cloning, sequencing, and molecular
analysis of the grdAB operon that contains two in-frame TGA codons for selenium
incorporation.

Kreimer S(1), Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Germany.

A 2.8-kb HindIII fragment, containing three open reading frames, has been cloned 
and sequenced from Clostridium litorale. The first gene grdA encoded the
selenocysteine-containing protein PA of the glycine reductase complex, a protein 
of 159 amino acids with a deduced molecular mass of 16.7 kDa. The second gene
(grdB) encoded the 47-kDa subunit of the substrate-specific selenoprotein PB
glycine that is composed of 437 amino acids. The third gene contained the
5'-region of the gene for thioredoxin reductase, trxB. All gene products shared
high similarity with the corresponding proteins from Eubacterium acidaminophilum.
In both genes grdA and grdB, the opal termination codon (TGA) was found inframe, 
indicating the presence of selenocysteine in both polypeptides. Northern-blot
analysis showed that grdA and grdB are organized as one operon. Unlike
Escherichia coli, no stable secondary structures of the corresponding mRNA were
found immediately downstream of the UGA codons to direct an insertion of
selenocysteine into the grdA and grdB transcripts of C. litorale. Instead, a
secondary structure was identified in the 3'-untranslated region of grdB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.192_c.x 
PMID: 8529640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Res Microbiol. 1995 Feb;146(2):121-8.

Synthetic competition between cytoplasmic folding and translocation of a soluble 
membrane protein domain.

Uhland K(1), Zander T, Ehrmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Konstanz, Germany.

In wild-type strains of Escherichia coli, alkaline phosphatase (AP), either when 
present as a soluble protein or when fused to a membrane protein, is only active 
after translocation to the periplasm. In thioredoxin reductase (trxB) mutants,
however, cytoplasmically localized AP can form disulphide bonds and can reach an 
active conformation. Once it has folded in the cytoplasm, it can no longer be
translocated. On the other hand, when AP is fused to periplasmic domains of a
membrane protein, translocation can be more rapid than folding. Thus, expressing 
hybrids of AP and integral membrane proteins in a trxB mutant generates
competition between folding of AP in the cytoplasm and its translocation to the
periplasm. The cellular localization of AP can be monitored in phosphoserine
phosphatase (serB) mutants causing auxotrophy for L-serine. Cytoplasmically but
not periplasmically localized AP can compensate for the lack of SerB, leading to 
growth on indicator plates. As expected, when AP was fused to cytoplasmic domains
of membrane proteins, serB-mediated auxotrophy was abolished. Surprisingly, AP
fusions to periplasmic domains exhibited a non-uniform response pattern. Fusions 
that translocate AP rapidly did not complement the SerB defect, while those that 
export AP only slowly could do so. The usefulness of these strains for studying a
variety of aspects related to membrane protein biogenesis is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0923-2508(96)80890-4 
PMID: 7652206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Oct 15;217(2):791-8.

Components of glycine reductase from Eubacterium acidaminophilum. Cloning,
sequencing and identification of the genes for thioredoxin reductase, thioredoxin
and selenoprotein PA.

Lübbers M(1), Andreesen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Germany.

The genes encoding thioredoxin reductase (trxB), thioredoxin (trxA), protein PA
of glycine reductase (grdA) and the first 23 amino acids of the large subunit of 
protein PC of glycine reductase (grdC) belonging to the reductive deamination
systems present in Eubacterium acidaminophilum were cloned and sequenced. The
proteins were products of closely linked genes with 314 codons (thioredoxin
reductase), 110 codons (thioredoxin), and 158 codons (protein PA). The protein
previously called 'atypically small lipoamide dehydrogenase' or 'electron
transferring flavoprotein' could now conclusively be identified as a thioredoxin 
reductase (subunit mass of 34781 Da) by the alignment with the enzyme of
Escherichia coli showing the same typical order of the corresponding domains. The
thioredoxin (molecular mass of 11742 Da) deviated considerably from the known
consensus sequence, even in the most strongly conserved redox-active segment
WCGPC that was now GCVPC. The selenocysteine of protein PA (molecular mass of
16609 Da) was encoded by TGA. The protein was highly similar to those of
Clostridium purinolyticum and Clostridium sticklandii involved in glycine
reductase. Thioredoxin reductase and thioredoxin of E. acidaminophilum could be
successfully expressed in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb18307.x 
PMID: 8223622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (efeB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2007 Aug;65(4):857-75. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

EfeUOB (YcdNOB) is a tripartite, acid-induced and CpxAR-regulated, low-pH Fe2+
transporter that is cryptic in Escherichia coli K-12 but functional in E. coli
O157:H7.

Cao J(1), Woodhall MR, Alvarez J, Cartron ML, Andrews SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading,
RG6 6AJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Mol Microbiol. 2007 Nov;66(3):827.

Escherichia coli possesses iron transporters specific for either Fe2+ or Fe3+.
Although Fe2+ is far more soluble than Fe3+, it rapidly oxidizes aerobically at
pH > or = 7. Thus, FeoAB, the major Fe2+ transporter of E. coli, operates
anaerobically. However, Fe2+ remains stable aerobically under acidic conditions, 
although a low-pH Fe2+ importer has not been previously identified. Here we show 
that ycdNOB (efeUOB) specifies the first such transporter. efeUOB is repressed at
high pH by CpxAR, and is Fe2+-Fur repressed. EfeU is homologous to the
high-affinity iron permease, Ftr1p, of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi. 
EfeO is periplasmic with a cupredoxin N-terminal domain; EfeB is also periplasmic
and is haem peroxidase-like. All three Efe proteins are required for Efe
function. The efeU gene of E. coli K-12 is cryptic due to a frameshift mutation -
repair of the single-base-pair deletion generates a functional EfeUOB system. In 
contrast, the efeUOB operon of the enterohaemorrhagic strain, O157:H7, lacks any 
frameshift and is functional. A 'wild-type' K-12 strain bearing a functional
EfeUOB displays a major growth advantage under aerobic, low-pH, low-iron
conditions when a competing metal is provided. 55Fe transport assays confirm the 
ferrous iron specificity of EfeUOB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05802.x 
PMID: 17627767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (csgD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Mol Biol. 2019 Nov 22;431(23):4775-4793. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.04.001. Epub
2019 Apr 4.

A c-di-GMP-Based Switch Controls Local Heterogeneity of Extracellular Matrix
Synthesis which Is Crucial for Integrity and Morphogenesis of Escherichia coli
Macrocolony Biofilms.

Serra DO(1), Hengge R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: regine.hengge@hu-berlin.de.

The extracellular matrix in macrocolony biofilms of Escherichia coli is arranged 
in a complex large-scale architecture, with homogenic matrix production close to 
the surface, whereas zones further below display pronounced local heterogeneity
of matrix production, which results in distinct three-dimensional architectural
structures. Combining genetics, cryosectioning and fluorescence microscopy of
macrocolony biofilms, we demonstrate here in situ that this local matrix
heterogeneity is generated by a c-di-GMP-dependent molecular switch characterized
by several nested positive and negative feedback loops. In this switch, the
trigger phosphodiesterase PdeR is the key component for establishing local
heterogeneity in the activation of the transcription factor MlrA, which in turn
activates expression of the major matrix regulator CsgD. Upon its release of
direct inhibition by PdeR, the second switch component, the diguanylate cyclase
DgcM, activates MlrA by direct interaction. Antagonistically acting PdeH and DgcE
provide for a PdeR-sensed c-di-GMP input into this switch and-via their spatially
differentially controlled expression-generate the long-range vertical asymmetry
of the matrix architecture. Using flow cytometry, we show heterogeneity of CsgD
expression to also occur in spatially unstructured planktonic cultures, where it 
is controlled by the same c-di-GMP circuitry as in macrocolony biofilms.
Quantification by flow cytometry also showed CsgDON subpopulations with distinct 
CsgD expression levels and revealed an additional fine-tuning feedback within the
PdeR/DgcM-mediated switch that depends on c-di-GMP synthesis by DgcM. Finally,
local heterogeneity of matrix production was found to be crucial for the
tissue-like elasticity that allows for large-scale wrinkling and folding of
macrocolony biofilms.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.04.001 
PMID: 30954572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jul;101(1):136-51. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13379. Epub 2016 May 6.

The green tea polyphenol EGCG inhibits E. coli biofilm formation by impairing
amyloid curli fibre assembly and downregulating the biofilm regulator CsgD via
the σ(E) -dependent sRNA RybB.

Serra DO(1), Mika F(1), Richter AM(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 10115,
Berlin, Germany.

In bacterial biofilms, which are often involved in chronic infections, cells are 
surrounded by a self-produced extracellular matrix that contains amyloid fibres, 
exopolysaccharides and other biopolymers. The matrix contributes to the
pronounced resistance of biofilms against antibiotics and host immune systems.
Being highly inflammatory, matrix amyloids such as curli fibres of Escherichia
coli can also play a role in pathogenicity. Using macrocolony biofilms of
commensal and pathogenic E. coli as a model system, we demonstrate here that the 
green tea polyphenol epigallocatachin gallate (EGCG) is a potent antibiofilm
agent. EGCG virtually eliminates the biofilm matrix by directly interfering with 
the assembly of curli subunits into amyloid fibres, and by triggering the σ(E)
cell envelope stress response and thereby reducing the expression of CsgD - a
crucial activator of curli and cellulose biosynthesis - due to csgD mRNA
targeting by the σ(E) -dependent sRNA RybB. These findings highlight EGCG as a
potential adjuvant for antibiotic therapy of biofilm-associated infections.
Moreover, EGCG may support therapies against pathogenic E. coli that produce
inflammatory curli fibres along with Shigatoxin.

© 2016 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13379 
PMID: 26992034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Environ Microbiol. 2015 Dec;17(12):5073-88. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12991. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

Vertical stratification of matrix production is essential for physical integrity 
and architecture of macrocolony biofilms of Escherichia coli.

Serra DO(1), Klauck G(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
10115, Germany.

Bacterial macrocolony biofilms grow into intricate three-dimensional structures
that depend on self-produced extracellular polymers conferring protection,
cohesion and elasticity to the biofilm. In Escherichia coli, synthesis of this
matrix - consisting of amyloid curli fibres and cellulose - requires CsgD, a
transcription factor regulated by the stationary phase sigma factor RpoS, and
occurs in the nutrient-deprived cells of the upper layer of macrocolonies. Is
this asymmetric matrix distribution functionally important or is it just a
fortuitous by-product of an unavoidable nutrient gradient? In order to address
this question, the RpoS-dependent csgD promoter was replaced by a vegetative
promoter. This re-wiring of csgD led to CsgD and matrix production in both strata
of macrocolonies, with the lower layer transforming into a rigid 'base plate' of 
growing yet curli-connected cells. As a result, the two strata broke apart
followed by desiccation and exfoliation of the top layer. By contrast,
matrix-free cells at the bottom of wild-type macrocolonies maintain colony
contact with the humid agar support by flexibly filling the space that opens up
under buckling areas of the macrocolony. Precisely regulated stratification in
matrix-free and matrix-producing cell layers is thus essential for the physical
integrity and architecture of E. coli macrocolony biofilms.

© 2015 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12991 
PMCID: PMC5014196
PMID: 26234179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. RNA Biol. 2014;11(5):494-507. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Small RNAs in the control of RpoS, CsgD, and biofilm architecture of Escherichia 
coli.

Mika F(1), Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie; Humboldt Universität zu Berlin; Berlin,
Germany.

Amyloid curli fibers and cellulose are extracellular matrix components produced
in the stationary phase top layer of E. coli macrocolonies, which confer physical
protection, strong cohesion, elasticity, and wrinkled morphology to these
biofilms. Curli and cellulose synthesis is controlled by a three-level
transcription factor (TF) cascade with the RpoS sigma subunit of RNA polymerase
at the top, the MerR-like TF MlrA, and the biofilm regulator CsgD, with two
c-di-GMP control modules acting as key switching devices. Additional signal input
and fine-tuning is provided by an entire series of small RNAs-ArcZ, DsrA, RprA,
McaS, OmrA/OmrB, GcvB, and RydC--that differentially control all three TF modules
by direct mRNA interaction. This review not only summarizes the mechanisms of
action of these sRNAs, but also addresses the question of how these sRNAs and the
regulators they target contribute to building the intriguing three-dimensional
microarchitecture and macromorphology of these biofilms.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.28867 
PMCID: PMC4152358
PMID: 25028968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):2001-14. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.120. Epub 2013 May
24.

The EAL domain protein YciR acts as a trigger enzyme in a c-di-GMP signalling
cascade in E. coli biofilm control.

Lindenberg S(1), Klauck G, Pesavento C, Klauck E, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1972-4.

C-di-GMP-which is produced by diguanylate cyclases (DGC) and degraded by specific
phosphodiesterases (PDEs)-is a ubiquitous second messenger in bacterial biofilm
formation. In Escherichia coli, several DGCs (YegE, YdaM) and PDEs (YhjH, YciR)
and the MerR-like transcription factor MlrA regulate the transcription of csgD,
which encodes a biofilm regulator essential for producing amyloid curli fibres of
the biofilm matrix. Here, we demonstrate that this system operates as a
signalling cascade, in which c-di-GMP controlled by the DGC/PDE pair YegE/YhjH
(module I) regulates the activity of the YdaM/YciR pair (module II). Via multiple
direct interactions, the two module II proteins form a signalling complex with
MlrA. YciR acts as a connector between modules I and II and functions as a
trigger enzyme: its direct inhibition of the DGC YdaM is relieved when it binds
and degrades c-di-GMP generated by module I. As a consequence, YdaM then
generates c-di-GMP and-by direct and specific interaction-activates MlrA to
stimulate csgD transcription. Trigger enzymes may represent a general principle
in local c-di-GMP signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2013.120 
PMCID: PMC3715855
PMID: 23708798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. mBio. 2013 Mar 19;4(2):e00103-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00103-13.

Microanatomy at cellular resolution and spatial order of physiological
differentiation in a bacterial biofilm.

Serra DO(1), Richter AM, Klauck G, Mika F, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013 May;11(5):300.
    MBio. 2013;4(2):e00225-13.
    MBio. 2013;4(2):e00245-13.

Bacterial biofilms are highly structured multicellular communities whose
formation involves flagella and an extracellular matrix of adhesins, amyloid
fibers, and exopolysaccharides. Flagella are produced by still-dividing
rod-shaped Escherichia coli cells during postexponential growth when nutrients
become suboptimal. Upon entry into stationary phase, however, cells stop
producing flagella, become ovoid, and generate amyloid curli fibers. These
morphological changes, as well as accompanying global changes in gene expression 
and cellular physiology, depend on the induction of the stationary-phase sigma
subunit of RNA polymerase, σ(S) (RpoS), the nucleotide second messengers cyclic
AMP (cAMP), ppGpp, and cyclic-di-GMP, and a biofilm-controlling transcription
factor, CsgD. Using flagella, curli fibers, a CsgD::GFP reporter, and cell
morphology as "anatomical" hallmarks in fluorescence and scanning electron
microscopy, different physiological zones in macrocolony biofilms of E. coli K-12
can be distinguished at cellular resolution. Small ovoid cells encased in a
network of curli fibers form the outer biofilm layer. Inner regions are
characterized by heterogeneous CsgD::GFP and curli expression. The bottom zone of
the macrocolonies features elongated dividing cells and a tight mesh of entangled
flagella, the formation of which requires flagellar motor function. Also, the
cells in the outer-rim growth zone produce flagella, which wrap around and tether
cells together. Adjacent to this growth zone, small chains and patches of shorter
curli-surrounded cells appear side by side with flagellated curli-free cells
before curli coverage finally becomes confluent, with essentially all cells in
the surface layer being encased in "curli baskets."IMPORTANCE: Heterogeneity or
cellular differentiation in biofilms is a commonly accepted concept, but direct
evidence at the microscale has been difficult to obtain. Our study reveals the
microanatomy and microphysiology of an Escherichia coli macrocolony biofilm at an
unprecedented cellular resolution, with physiologically different zones and
strata forming as a function of known global regulatory networks that respond to 
biofilm-intrinsic gradients of nutrient supply. In addition, this study
identifies zones of heterogeneous and potentially bistable CsgD and curli
expression, shows bacterial curli networks to strikingly resemble Alzheimer
plaques, and suggests a new role of flagella as an architectural element in
biofilms.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00103-13 
PMCID: PMC3604763
PMID: 23512962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Feb 26;14(3):4560-79. doi: 10.3390/ijms14034560.

Small Regulatory RNAs in the Control of Motility and Biofilm Formation in E. coli
and Salmonella.

Mika F(1), Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 14195,
Germany. franziska.mika@fu-berlin.de.

Biofilm formation in Escherichia coli and other enteric bacteria involves the
inverse regulation of the synthesis of flagella and biofilm matrix components
such as amyloid curli fibres, cellulose, colanic acid and
poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PGA). Physiologically, these processes reflect the
transition from growth to stationary phase. At the molecular level, they are
tightly controlled by various sigma factors competing for RNA polymerase, a
series of transcription factors acting in hierarchical regulatory cascades and
several nucleotide messengers, including cyclic-di-GMP. In addition, a
surprisingly large number of small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) have been shown to
directly or indirectly modulate motility and/or biofilm formation. This review
aims at giving an overview of these sRNA regulators and their impact in biofilm
formation in E. coli and Salmonella. Special emphasis will be put on sRNAs, that 
have known targets such as the mRNAs of the flagellar master regulator FlhDC, the
stationary phase sigma factor σS (RpoS) and the key biofilm regulator CsgD that
have recently been shown to act as major hubs for regulation by multiple sRNAs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms14034560 
PMCID: PMC3634460
PMID: 23443158 


8. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Sep;85(5):893-906. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08147.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Molecular function and potential evolution of the biofilm-modulating blue
light-signalling pathway of Escherichia coli.

Tschowri N(1), Lindenberg S, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

Escherichia coli senses blue light via the BLUF-EAL protein BluF (YcgF). The
degenerate EAL domain of BluF does not have cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase
activity, but BluF directly antagonizes the MerR-like repressor BluR (YcgE),
which leads to expression of the ycgZ-ymgABC operon and activation of the Rcs
system (Tschowri et al., 2009; Genes Dev 23: 522-534). While bluR, bluF and ycgZ 
have individual transcriptional start sites, comparative genome analysis
indicates that the bluR-bluF-ycgZ-ymgAB region represents a functional unit in
various enteric bacteria that is characterized by bluF alleles encoding
degenerate EAL domains. Re-introducing conserved amino acids involved in
phosphodiesterase activity of EAL domains did not restore enzymatic activity or
c-di-GMP binding of BluF, but weakened its ability to antagonize BluR and
improved a residual interaction with the BluR paralogue MlrA, which controls
expression of the biofilm regulator CsgD and curli fibres. We identified the BluR
binding site in the ycgZ promoter and observed that BluR also has residual
affinity for the MlrA-dependent csgD promoter. Altogether, we propose that BluF
evolved from a blue light-regulated PDE into a specific antagonist of a duplicate
of MlrA that became BluR, which controls not only curli but various biofilm
functions via the Ymg/Rcs pathway.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08147.x 
PMCID: PMC3509220
PMID: 22783906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Apr;84(1):51-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08002.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 22.

Targeting of csgD by the small regulatory RNA RprA links stationary phase,
biofilm formation and cell envelope stress in Escherichia coli.

Mika F(1), Busse S, Possling A, Berkholz J, Tschowri N, Sommerfeldt N, Pruteanu
M, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

RprA is a small regulatory RNA known to weakly affect the translation of σ(S)
(RpoS) in Escherichia coli. Here we demonstrate that csgD, which encodes a
stationary phase-induced biofilm regulator, as well as ydaM, which encodes a
diguanylate cyclase involved in activating csgD transcription, are novel
negatively controlled RprA targets. As shown by extensive mutational analysis,
direct binding of RprA to the 5'-untranslated and translational initiation
regions of csgD mRNA inhibits translation and reduces csgD mRNA levels. In the
case of ydaM mRNA, RprA base-pairs directly downstream of the translational start
codon. In a feedforward loop, RprA can thus downregulate > 30 YdaM/CsgD-activated
genes including those for adhesive curli fimbriae. However, during early
stationary phase, when csgD transcription is strongly activated, the synthesis of
csgD mRNA exceeds that of RprA, which allows the accumulation of CsgD protein.
This situation is reversed when csgD transcription is shut off - for instance,
later in stationary phase or during biofilm formation - or by conditions that
further activate RprA expression via the Rcs two-component system. Thus,
antagonistic regulation of csgD and RprA at the mRNA level integrates cell
envelope stress signals with global gene expression during stationary phase and
biofilm formation.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08002.x 
PMCID: PMC3465796
PMID: 22356413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Microbiology (Reading). 2009 Apr;155(Pt 4):1318-1331. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.024257-0.

Gene expression patterns and differential input into curli fimbriae regulation of
all GGDEF/EAL domain proteins in Escherichia coli.

Sommerfeldt N(1), Possling A(1), Becker G(1), Pesavento C(1), Tschowri N(1),
Hengge R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

Switching from the motile planktonic bacterial lifestyle to a biofilm existence
is stimulated by the signalling molecule bis-(3'-5')-cyclic-diguanosine
monophosphate (cyclic-di-GMP), which is antagonistically controlled by
diguanylate cyclases (DGCs; characterized by GGDEF domains) and specific
phosphodiesterases (PDEs; mostly featuring EAL domains). Here, we present the
expression patterns of all 28 genes that encode GGDEF/EAL domain proteins in
Escherichia coli K-12. Twenty-one genes are expressed in Luria-Bertani medium,
with 15 being under sigma(S) control. While a small subset of GGDEF/EAL proteins 
(YeaJ and YhjH) is dominant and modulates motility in post-exponentially growing 
cells, a diverse battery of GGDEF/EAL proteins is deployed during entry into
stationary phase, especially in cells grown at reduced temperature (28 degrees
C). This suggests that multiple signal input into cyclic-di-GMP control is
particularly important in growth-restricted cells in an extra-host environment.
Six GGDEF/EAL genes differentially control the expression of adhesive curli
fimbriae. Besides the previously described ydaM, yciR, yegE and yhjH genes, these
are yhdA (csrD), which stimulates the expression of the DGC YdaM and the major
curli regulator CsgD, and yeaP, which contributes to expression of the curli
structural operon csgBAC. Finally, we discuss why other GGDEF/EAL domain-encoding
genes, despite being expressed, do not influence motility and/or curli formation.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.024257-0 
PMID: 19332833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (acnA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Res. 2021 Jan;242:126629. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629. Epub 2020 
Oct 22.

Participation of two sRNA RyhB homologs from the fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri
in bacterial physiology.

Acuña LG(1), Barros MJ(2), Montt F(3), Peñaloza D(4), Núñez P(5), Valdés I(6),
Gil F(7), Fuentes JA(8), Calderón IL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lillian.gabriela@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: mbarrosgamonal@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: fernanda.monttc@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: diego.ignacio.mp@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: paulanunezrojas@gmail.com.
(6)Desarrollo de Biológicos, Veterquímica S.A., Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: ivaldes@veterquimica.cl.
(7)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: fernandogil@unab.cl.
(8)Laboratorio de Genética y Patogénesis Bacteriana, Departamento de Ciencias
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, 
Chile. Electronic address: jfuentes@unab.cl.
(9)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lcalderon@unab.cl.

Small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression and
physiology in bacteria. RyhB is an iron-responsive sRNA well characterized in
Escherichia coli and conserved in other Enterobacteriaceae. In this study, we
identified and characterized two RyhB homologs (named RyhB-1 and RyhB-2) in the
fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri. We found that, as in other Enterobacteriaceae,
both RyhB-1 and RyhB-2 are induced under iron starvation, repressed by the Fur
regulator, and depend on Hfq for stability. Despite these similarities in
expression, the mutant strains of Y. ruckeri lacking RyhB-1 (ΔryhB-1) or RyhB-2
(ΔryhB-2) exhibited differential phenotypes. In comparison with the wild type,
the ΔryhB-1 strain showed a hypermotile phenotype, reduced biofilm formation,
increased replication rate, faster growth, and increased ATP levels in bacterial 
cultures. By contrast, in salmon cell cultures, the ΔryhB-1 strain exhibited an
increased survival. On the other hand, the ΔryhB-2 strain was non-motile and
showed augmented biofilm formation as compared to the wild type. The expression
of a subset of RyhB conserved targets, selected from different bacterial species,
was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR in wild type, ΔryhB-1, ΔryhB-2, and ΔryhB-1
ΔryhB-2 strains cultured in iron-depleted media. RyhB-1 negatively affected the
expression of most analyzed genes (sodB, acnA, sdhC, bfr, fliF, among others),
whose functions are related to metabolism and motility, involving iron-containing
proteins. Among the genes analyzed, only sdhC and bfr appeared as targets for
RyhB-2. Taken together, these results indicate that Y. ruckeri RyhB homologs
participate in the modulation of the bacterial physiology with non-redundant
roles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629 
PMID: 33153884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiology (Reading). 2013 Jun;159(Pt 6):1209-1216. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.067934-0. Epub 2013 May 1.

Characterization of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium aconitase A.

Baothman OAS(1), Rolfe MD(1), Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Aconitases (Acn) are iron-sulfur proteins that catalyse the reversible
isomerization of citrate and isocitrate via the intermediate cis-aconitate in the
Krebs cycle. Some Acn proteins are bi-functional and under conditions of iron
starvation and oxidative stress lose their iron-sulfur clusters and become
post-transcriptional regulators by binding specific mRNA targets. Many bacterial 
species possess two genetically distinct aconitase proteins, AcnA and AcnB.
Current understanding of the regulation and functions of AcnA and AcnB in dual
Acn bacteria is based on a model developed in Escherichia coli. Thus, AcnB is the
major Krebs cycle enzyme expressed during exponential growth, whereas AcnA is a
more stable, stationary phase and stress-induced enzyme, and both E. coli Acns
are bi-functional. Here a second dual Acn bacterium, Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium), has been analysed. Phenotypic traits of S.
Typhimurium acn mutants were consistent with AcnB acting as the major Acn
protein. Promoter fusion experiments indicated that acnB transcription was
~10-fold greater than that of acnA and that acnA expression was regulated by the 
cyclic-AMP receptor protein (CRP, glucose starvation), the fumarate nitrate
reduction regulator (FNR, oxygen starvation), the ferric uptake regulator (Fur,
iron starvation) and the superoxide response protein (SoxR, oxidative stress). In
contrast to E. coli, S. Typhimurium acnA was not induced in the stationary phase.
Furthermore, acnA expression was enhanced in an acnB mutant, presumably to
partially compensate for the lack of AcnB activity. Isolated S. Typhimurium AcnA 
protein had kinetic and mRNA-binding properties similar to those described for E.
coli AcnA. Thus, the work reported here provides a second example of the
regulation and function of AcnA and AcnB proteins in a dual Acn bacterium.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.067934-0 
PMID: 23637460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMC Microbiol. 2010 Oct 16;10:264. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-264.

The tricarboxylic acid cycle in Shewanella oneidensis is independent of Fur and
RyhB control.

Yang Y(1), McCue LA, Parsons AB, Feng S, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China. yangyf@tsinghua.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: It is well established in E. coli and Vibrio cholerae that strains
harboring mutations in the ferric uptake regulator gene (fur) are unable to
utilize tricarboxylic acid (TCA) compounds, due to the down-regulation of key TCA
cycle enzymes, such as AcnA and SdhABCD. This down-regulation is mediated by a
Fur-regulated small regulatory RNA named RyhB. It is unclear in the
γ-proteobacterium S. oneidensis whether TCA is also regulated by Fur and RyhB.
RESULTS: In the present study, we showed that a fur deletion mutant of S.
oneidensis could utilize TCA compounds. Consistently, expression of the TCA cycle
genes acnA and sdhA was not down-regulated in the mutant. To explore this
observation further, we identified a ryhB gene in Shewanella species and
experimentally demonstrated the gene expression. Further experiments suggested
that RyhB was up-regulated in fur mutant, but that AcnA and SdhA were not
controlled by RyhB.
CONCLUSIONS: These cumulative results delineate an important difference of the
Fur-RyhB regulatory cycle between S. oneidensis and other γ-proteobacteria. This 
work represents a step forward for understanding the unique regulation in S.
oneidensis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-264 
PMCID: PMC2964681
PMID: 20950482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6800-8.

The glutathione-glutaredoxin system in Rhodobacter capsulatus: part of a complex 
regulatory network controlling defense against oxidative stress.

Li K(1), Hein S, Zou W, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32,
35392 Giessen, Germany.

Mutants with defects in components of the glutathione-glutaredoxin (GSH/Grx)
system of Rhodobacter capsulatus were constructed to study its role in defense
against oxidative stress and the redox-dependent formation of photosynthetic
complexes. The lack of the glutaredoxin 3 gene (grxC) or the glutathione
synthetase B gene (gshB) resulted in lower growth rates under aerobic conditions 
and higher sensitivity to oxidative stress, confirming the role of the GSH/Grx
system in oxidative stress defense. Both mutants are highly sensitive to
disulfide stress, indicating a major contribution of the GSH/Grx system to the
thiol-disulfide redox buffer in the cytoplasm. Like mutations in the thioredoxin 
system, mutations in the GSH/Grx system affected the formation of photosynthetic 
complexes, which is redox dependent in R. capsulatus. Expression of the genes
grxC, gshB, grxA for glutaredoxin 1, and gorA for glutathione reductase, all
encoding components of the GSH/Grx system, was not induced by oxidative stress.
Other genes, for which a role in oxidative stress was established in Escherichia 
coli, acnA, fpr, fur, and katG, were strongly induced by oxidative stress in R.
capsulatus. Mutations in the grxC, and/or gshB, and/or trxC (thioredoxin 2) genes
affected expression of these genes, indicating an interplay of the different
defense systems against oxidative stress. The OxyR and the SoxRS regulons control
the expression of many genes involved in oxidative stress defense in E. coli in
response to H2O2 and superoxide, respectively. Our data and the available genome 
sequence of R. capsulatus suggest that a SoxRS system is lacking but an
alternative superoxide specific regulator exists in R. capsulatus. While the
expression of gorA and grxA is regulated by H2O2 in E. coli this is not the case 
in R. capsulatus, indicating that the OxyR regulons of these two species are
significantly different.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6800-6808.2004 
PMCID: PMC522184
PMID: 15466032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4620-5. Epub 2002 Mar 26.

A small RNA regulates the expression of genes involved in iron metabolism in
Escherichia coli.

Massé E(1), Gottesman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, Building 37, Room 
5132, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A small RNA, RyhB, was found as part of a genomewide search for novel small RNAs 
in Escherichia coli. The RyhB 90-nt RNA down-regulates a set of iron-storage and 
iron-using proteins when iron is limiting; it is itself negatively regulated by
the ferric uptake repressor protein, Fur (Ferric uptake regulator). RyhB RNA
levels are inversely correlated with mRNA levels for the sdhCDAB operon, encoding
succinate dehydrogenase, as well as five other genes previously shown to be
positively regulated by Fur by an unknown mechanism. These include two other
genes encoding enzymes in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, acnA and fumA, two
ferritin genes, ftnA and bfr, and a gene for superoxide dismutase, sodB. Fur
positive regulation of all these genes is fully reversed in an ryhB mutant. Our
results explain the previously observed inability of fur mutants to grow on
succinate. RyhB requires the RNA-binding protein, Hfq, for activity. Sequences
within RyhB are complementary to regions within each of the target genes,
suggesting that RyhB acts as an antisense RNA. In sdhCDAB, the complementary
region is at the end of the first gene of the sdhCDAB operon; full-length sdhCDAB
message disappears and a truncated message, equivalent in size to the region
upstream of the complementarity, is detected when RyhB is expressed. RyhB
provides a mechanism for the cell to down-regulate iron-storage proteins and
nonessential iron-containing proteins when iron is limiting, thus modulating
intracellular iron usage to supplement mechanisms for iron uptake directly
regulated by Fur.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.032066599 
PMCID: PMC123697
PMID: 11917098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Dec;143 ( Pt 12):3795-3805. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-12-3795.

Transcriptional regulation of the aconitase genes (acnA and acnB) of Escherichia 
coli.

Cunningham L(1), Gruer MJ(1), Guest JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Escherichia coli contains two differentially regulated aconitase genes, acnA and 
acnB. Two acnA promoters transcribing from start points located 407 bp (P1acnA)
and 50 bp (P2acnA) upstream of the acnA coding region, and one acnB promoter
(PacnB) with a start point 95 bp upstream of the acnB coding region, were
identified by primer extension analysis. A 2.8 kb acnA monocistronic transcript
was detected by Northern blot hybridization, but only in redox-stressed
(methyl-viologen-treated) cultures, and a 2.5 kb acnB monocistronic transcript
was detected in exponential- but not stationary-phase cultures. These findings
are consistent with previous observations that acnA is specifically subject to
SoxRS-mediated activation, whereas acnB encodes the major aconitase that is
synthesized earlier in the growth cycle than AcnA. Further studies with acn-lacZ 
gene fusions and a wider range of transcription regulators indicated that acnA
expression is initiated by sigma 38 from P1acnA, and from P2acnA it is activated 
directly or indirectly by CRP, FruR, Fur and SoxRS, and repressed by ArcA and
FNR. In contrast, acnB expression is activated by CRP and repressed by ArcA, FruR
and Fis from PacnB. Comparable studies with fum-lacZ fusions indicated that
transcription of fumC, but not of fumA or fumB, is initiated by RNA polymerase
containing sigma 38. It is concluded that AcnB is the major citric acid cycle
enzyme, whereas AcnA is an aerobic stationary-phase enzyme that is specifically
induced by iron and redox-stress.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-12-3795 
PMID: 9421904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 1994 Oct;140 ( Pt 10):2531-41.

Two genetically-distinct and differentially-regulated aconitases (AcnA and AcnB) 
in Escherichia coli.

Gruer MJ(1), Guest JR.

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK.

An acnA mutant of Escherichia coli was constructed by replacing the chromosomal
acnA gene by an internally deleted derivative containing a kanR cassette.
Southern and Western blotting confirmed that the acnA gene had been replaced by
the disrupted gene and that the aconitase A protein was no longer expressed.
However, the mutant failed to exhibit the anticipated glutamate auxotrophy and it
retained a residual aconitase activity. This activity was due to an analogous
unstable enzyme(s) designated aconitase B. Studies on the regulation of aconitase
A synthesis using an acnA-lacZ translational fusion showed that the acnA gene
resembles other citric acid cycle genes in being subject to CRP-mediated
catabolite repression and ArcA-mediated anaerobic repression. In addition to
being activated by the SoxRS oxidative stress regulatory system, the acnA gene
appeared to be activated by the ferric uptake regulator (Fur). It was concluded
that the acnA gene belongs to at least four global regulatory networks, crp,
arcA, fur and soxRS. In contrast, the aconitase B activity decreased after
exposure to oxidative stress and was less affected by anaerobiosis. Comparable
studies with the fumarase genes (fumA, B and C) indicated that fumA (encoding the
unstable aerobic iron-sulphur-containing fumarase) is activated by the ferric
uptake regulator (Fur) and fumC (encoding the stable fumarase) is activated by
the SoxRS oxidative stress regulatory system.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-140-10-2531 
PMID: 8000525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (sodB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Res. 2021 Jan;242:126629. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629. Epub 2020 
Oct 22.

Participation of two sRNA RyhB homologs from the fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri
in bacterial physiology.

Acuña LG(1), Barros MJ(2), Montt F(3), Peñaloza D(4), Núñez P(5), Valdés I(6),
Gil F(7), Fuentes JA(8), Calderón IL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lillian.gabriela@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: mbarrosgamonal@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: fernanda.monttc@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: diego.ignacio.mp@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: paulanunezrojas@gmail.com.
(6)Desarrollo de Biológicos, Veterquímica S.A., Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: ivaldes@veterquimica.cl.
(7)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: fernandogil@unab.cl.
(8)Laboratorio de Genética y Patogénesis Bacteriana, Departamento de Ciencias
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, 
Chile. Electronic address: jfuentes@unab.cl.
(9)Laboratorio de RNAs Bacterianos, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad
de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile. Electronic
address: lcalderon@unab.cl.

Small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression and
physiology in bacteria. RyhB is an iron-responsive sRNA well characterized in
Escherichia coli and conserved in other Enterobacteriaceae. In this study, we
identified and characterized two RyhB homologs (named RyhB-1 and RyhB-2) in the
fish pathogen Yersinia ruckeri. We found that, as in other Enterobacteriaceae,
both RyhB-1 and RyhB-2 are induced under iron starvation, repressed by the Fur
regulator, and depend on Hfq for stability. Despite these similarities in
expression, the mutant strains of Y. ruckeri lacking RyhB-1 (ΔryhB-1) or RyhB-2
(ΔryhB-2) exhibited differential phenotypes. In comparison with the wild type,
the ΔryhB-1 strain showed a hypermotile phenotype, reduced biofilm formation,
increased replication rate, faster growth, and increased ATP levels in bacterial 
cultures. By contrast, in salmon cell cultures, the ΔryhB-1 strain exhibited an
increased survival. On the other hand, the ΔryhB-2 strain was non-motile and
showed augmented biofilm formation as compared to the wild type. The expression
of a subset of RyhB conserved targets, selected from different bacterial species,
was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR in wild type, ΔryhB-1, ΔryhB-2, and ΔryhB-1
ΔryhB-2 strains cultured in iron-depleted media. RyhB-1 negatively affected the
expression of most analyzed genes (sodB, acnA, sdhC, bfr, fliF, among others),
whose functions are related to metabolism and motility, involving iron-containing
proteins. Among the genes analyzed, only sdhC and bfr appeared as targets for
RyhB-2. Taken together, these results indicate that Y. ruckeri RyhB homologs
participate in the modulation of the bacterial physiology with non-redundant
roles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126629 
PMID: 33153884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microb Cell Fact. 2019 Feb 7;18(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12934-019-1080-6.

Direct pathway cloning of the sodorifen biosynthetic gene cluster and recombinant
generation of its product in E. coli.

Duell ER(1), D'Agostino PM(1), Shapiro N(2), Woyke T(2), Fuchs TM(3)(4), Gulder
TAM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biosystems Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Center for Integrated
Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße
4, 85748, Garching, Germany.
(2)Department of Energy, Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut
Creek, CA, 94598, USA.
(3)ZIEL Institute for Food & Health, Lehrstuhl für Mikrobielle Ökologie,
Department biowissenschaftliche Grundlagen, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(4)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institut für Molekulare Pathogenese, Jena,
Germany.
(5)Biosystems Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Center for Integrated
Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße
4, 85748, Garching, Germany. tobias.gulder@ch.tum.de.
(6)Chair of Technical Biochemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Bergstraße
66, 01602, Dresden, Germany. tobias.gulder@ch.tum.de.

BACKGROUND: Serratia plymuthica WS3236 was selected for whole genome sequencing
based on preliminary genetic and chemical screening indicating the presence of
multiple natural product pathways. This led to the identification of a putative
sodorifen biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC). The natural product sodorifen is a
volatile organic compound (VOC) with an unusual polymethylated hydrocarbon
bicyclic structure (C16H26) produced by selected strains of S. plymuthica. The
BGC encoding sodorifen consists of four genes, two of which (sodA, sodB) are
homologs of genes encoding enzymes of the non-mevalonate pathway and are thought 
to enhance the amounts of available farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), the precursor
of sodorifen. Proceeding from FPP, only two enzymes are necessary to produce
sodorifen: an S-adenosyl methionine dependent methyltransferase (SodC) with
additional cyclisation activity and a terpene-cyclase (SodD). Previous analysis
of S. plymuthica found sodorifen production titers are generally low and vary
significantly among different producer strains. This precludes studies on the
still elusive biological function of this structurally and biosynthetically
fascinating bacterial terpene.
RESULTS: Sequencing and mining of the S. plymuthica WS3236 genome revealed the
presence of 38 BGCs according to antiSMASH analysis, including a putative
sodorifen BGC. Further genome mining for sodorifen and sodorifen-like BGCs
throughout bacteria was performed using SodC and SodD as queries and identified a
total of 28 sod-like gene clusters. Using direct pathway cloning (DiPaC) we
intercepted the 4.6 kb candidate sodorifen BGC from S. plymuthica WS3236 (sodA-D)
and transformed it into Escherichia coli BL21. Heterologous expression under the 
control of the tetracycline inducible PtetO promoter firmly linked this BGC to
sodorifen production. By utilizing this newly established expression system, we
increased the production yields by approximately 26-fold when compared to the
native producer. In addition, sodorifen was easily isolated in high purity by
simple head-space sampling.
CONCLUSIONS: Genome mining of all available genomes within the NCBI and JGI IMG
databases led to the identification of a wealth of sod-like pathways which may be
responsible for producing a range of structurally unknown sodorifen analogs.
Introduction of the S. plymuthica WS3236 sodorifen BGC into the fast-growing
heterologous expression host E. coli with a very low VOC background led to a
significant increase in both sodorifen product yield and purity compared to the
native producer. By providing a reliable, high-level production system, this
study sets the stage for future investigations of the biological role and
function of sodorifen and for functionally unlocking the bioinformatically
identified putative sod-like pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1080-6 
PMCID: PMC6366047
PMID: 30732610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jun 6;114(23):6022-6027. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1703576114. Epub 2017 May 22.

Mechanism of H2S-mediated protection against oxidative stress in Escherichia
coli.

Mironov A(1)(2), Seregina T(2), Nagornykh M(2), Luhachack LG(3), Korolkova N(1), 
Lopes LE(1), Kotova V(1), Zavilgelsky G(1), Shakulov R(1), Shatalin K(3), Nudler 
E(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, State Research Institute of Genetics and Selection of 
Industrial Microorganisms, Moscow 117545, Russia.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology,
Russian Academy of Science, Moscow 119991, Russia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016; evgeny.nudler@nyumc.org.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016.

Endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) renders bacteria highly resistant to oxidative 
stress, but its mechanism remains poorly understood. Here, we report that
3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (3MST) is the major source of endogenous H2S
in Escherichia coli Cellular resistance to H2O2 strongly depends on the activity 
of mstA, a gene that encodes 3MST. Deletion of the ferric uptake regulator (Fur) 
renders ∆mstA cells hypersensitive to H2O2 Conversely, induction of chromosomal
mstA from a strong pLtetO-1 promoter (P tet -mstA) renders ∆fur cells fully
resistant to H2O2 Furthermore, the endogenous level of H2S is reduced in ∆fur or 
∆sodA ∆sodB cells but restored after the addition of an iron chelator dipyridyl. 
Using a highly sensitive reporter of the global response to DNA damage (SOS) and 
the TUNEL assay, we show that 3MST-derived H2S protects chromosomal DNA from
oxidative damage. We also show that the induction of the CysB regulon in response
to oxidative stress depends on 3MST, whereas the CysB-regulated l-cystine
transporter, TcyP, plays the principle role in the 3MST-mediated generation of
H2S. These findings led us to propose a model to explain the interplay between
l-cysteine metabolism, H2S production, and oxidative stress, in which 3MST
protects E. coli against oxidative stress via l-cysteine utilization and
H2S-mediated sequestration of free iron necessary for the genotoxic Fenton
reaction.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1703576114 
PMCID: PMC5468659
PMID: 28533366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Aug 19;44(14):6707-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw273. Epub 2016
Apr 16.

Transcript degradation and noise of small RNA-controlled genes in a switch
activated network in Escherichia coli.

Arbel-Goren R(1), Tal A(1), Parasar B(1), Dym A(1), Costantino N(2), Muñoz-García
J(3), Court DL(4), Stavans J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.
(2)Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.
(3)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel Departamento de Matemáticas and GISC, Universidad Carlos
III de Madrid, Av. de la Universidad 30, 28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA courtd@mail.nih.gov.
(5)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel joel.stavans@weizmann.ac.il.

Post-transcriptional regulatory processes may change transcript levels and affect
cell-to-cell variability or noise. We study small-RNA downregulation to elucidate
its effects on noise in the iron homeostasis network of Escherichia coli In this 
network, the small-RNA RyhB undergoes stoichiometric degradation with the
transcripts of target genes in response to iron stress. Using single-molecule
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we measured transcript numbers of the
RyhB-regulated genes sodB and fumA in individual cells as a function of iron
deprivation. We observed a monotonic increase of noise with iron stress but no
evidence of theoretically predicted, enhanced stoichiometric fluctuations in
transcript numbers, nor of bistable behavior in transcript distributions. Direct 
detection of RyhB in individual cells shows that its noise is much smaller than
that of these two targets, when RyhB production is significant. A generalized
two-state model of bursty transcription that neglects RyhB fluctuations describes
quantitatively the dependence of noise and transcript distributions on iron
deprivation, enabling extraction of in vivo RyhB-mediated transcript degradation 
rates. The transcripts' threshold-linear behavior indicates that the effective in
vivo interaction strength between RyhB and its two target transcripts is
comparable. Strikingly, the bacterial cell response exhibits Fur-dependent,
switch-like activation instead of a graded response to iron deprivation.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw273 
PMCID: PMC5001584
PMID: 27085802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091243. eCollection
2014.

A mixed incoherent feed-forward loop allows conditional regulation of response
dynamics.

Semsey S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Models of Life, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Expression of the SodA superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in Escherichia coli is
regulated by superoxide concentration through the SoxRS system and also by Fur
(Ferric uptake regulator) through a mixed incoherent feed forward loop (FFL)
containing the RyhB small regulatory RNA. In this work I theoretically analyze
the function of this feed forward loop as part of the network controlling
expression of the two cytoplasmic superoxide dismutases, SodA and SodB. I find
that feed forward regulation allows faster response to superoxide stress at low
intracellular iron levels compared to iron rich conditions. That is, it can
conditionally modulate the response time of a superimposed transcriptional
control mechanism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091243 
PMCID: PMC3951346
PMID: 24621982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Oct 21;11:236. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-236.

The Fur regulon in anaerobically grown Salmonella enterica sv. Typhimurium:
identification of new Fur targets.

Troxell B(1), Fink RC, Porwollik S, McClelland M, Hassan HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695-7615, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Ferric uptake regulator (Fur) is a transcriptional regulator that
controls iron homeostasis in bacteria. Although the regulatory role of Fur in
Escherichia coli is well characterized, most of the studies were conducted under 
routine culture conditions, i.e., in ambient oxygen concentration. To reveal
potentially novel aspects of the Fur regulon in Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium under oxygen conditions similar to that encountered in the host, we
compared the transcriptional profiles of the virulent wild-type strain (ATCC
14028s) and its isogenic Δfur strain under anaerobic conditions.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of anaerobically grown Δfur S. Typhimurium
identified 298 differentially expressed genes. Expression of several genes
controlled by Fnr and NsrR appeared to be also dependent on Fur. Furthermore, Fur
was required for the activity of the cytoplasmic superoxide disumutases (MnSOD
and FeSOD). The regulation of FeSOD gene, sodB, occurred via small RNAs (i.e.,
the ryhB homologs, rfrA and rfrB) with the aid of the RNA chaperone Hfq. The
transcription of sodA was increased in Δfur; however, the enzyme was inactive due
to the incorporation of iron instead of manganese in SodA. Additionally, in Δfur,
the expression of the gene coding for the ferritin-like protein (ftnB) was
down-regulated, while the transcription of the gene coding for the nitric oxide
(NO·) detoxifying flavohemoglobin (hmpA) was up-regulated. The promoters of ftnB 
and hmpA do not contain recognized Fur binding motifs, which indicated their
probable indirect regulation by Fur. However, Fur activation of ftnB was
independent of Fnr. In addition, the expression of the gene coding for the
histone-like protein, H-NS (hns) was increased in Δfur. This may explain the
observed down-regulation of the tdc operon, responsible for the anaerobic
degradation of threonine, and ftnB in Δfur.
CONCLUSIONS: This study determined that Fur is a positive factor in ftnB
regulation, while serving to repress the expression of hmpA. Furthermore, Fur is 
required for the proper expression and activation of the antioxidant enzymes,
FeSOD and MnSOD. Finally, this work identified twenty-six new targets of Fur
regulation, and demonstrates that H-NS repressed genes are down-regulated in
Δfur.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-236 
PMCID: PMC3212961
PMID: 22017966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2009 Feb;191(4):1330-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.00849-08. Epub 2008 Dec 5.

The Hfq-dependent small noncoding RNA NrrF directly mediates Fur-dependent
positive regulation of succinate dehydrogenase in Neisseria meningitidis.

Metruccio MM(1), Fantappiè L, Serruto D, Muzzi A, Roncarati D, Donati C, Scarlato
V, Delany I.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Vaccines, Via Fiorentina 1, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Previous microarray studies have suggested that an indirect mechanism of Fur
regulation may be present in meningococcus at the posttranscriptional level
through a small regulatory RNA (sRNA) system analogous to that of Escherichia
coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Recently, a Fur-regulated sRNA, NrrF, was
identified that is involved in the iron regulation of the sdhA and sdhC succinate
dehydrogenase genes. Here we report a detailed transcriptional analysis of the
nrrF gene and show that NrrF is a Hfq-dependent sRNA. The Hfq protein mediates
nrrF downregulation and Fur-dependent upregulation of the sdhCDAB operon, the
major in vivo NrrF-regulated operon. NrrF forms a duplex in vitro with a region
of complementarity overlapping the sdhDA mRNA junction. Furthermore, Hfq binds to
NrrF in vitro and considerably enhances the efficiency of the interaction of the 
sRNA with the identified target. Our data suggest that Hfq-meditated binding of
NrrF to the in vivo target in the sdhCDAB mRNA may cause the rapid degradation of
the transcript, resulting in Fur-dependent positive regulation of succinate
dehydrogenase. In addition, while the upregulation of sodB and fumB by Fur is
dependent on the Hfq protein, it is unaffected in the nrrF knockout, which
suggests that there is more than one sRNA regulator involved in iron homeostasis 
in meningococcus.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00849-08 
PMCID: PMC2631994
PMID: 19060140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Dec;74(24):7643-53. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01490-08. Epub 
2008 Oct 24.

Possible involvement of an extracellular superoxide dismutase (SodA) as a radical
scavenger in poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) degradation.

Schulte C(1), Arenskötter M, Berekaa MM, Arenskötter Q, Priefert H, Steinbüchel
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekulare Mikrobiologie und Biotechnologie, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Correnstrasse 3, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Gordonia westfalica Kb1 and Gordonia polyisoprenivorans VH2 induce the formation 
of an extracellular superoxide dismutase (SOD) during poly(cis-1,4-isoprene)
degradation. To investigate the function of this enzyme in G. polyisoprenivorans 
VH2, the sodA gene was disrupted. The mutants exhibited reduced growth in liquid 
mineral salt media containing poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) as the sole carbon and
energy source, and no SOD activity was detectable in the supernatants of the
cultures. Growth experiments revealed that SodA activity is required for optimal 
growth on poly(cis-1,4-isoprene), whereas this enzyme has no effect on aerobic
growth in the presence of water-soluble substrates like succinate, acetate, and
propionate. This was detected by activity staining, and proof of expression was
by antibody detection of SOD. When SodA from G. westfalica Kb1 was heterologously
expressed in the sodA sodB double mutant Escherichia coli QC779, the recombinant 
mutant exhibited increased resistance to paraquat, thereby indicating the
functionality of the G. westfalica Kb1 SodA and indirectly protection of G.
westfalica cells by SodA from oxidative damage. Both sodA from G.
polyisoprenivorans VH2 and sodA from G. westfalica Kb1 coded for polypeptides
comprising 209 amino acids and having approximately 90% and 70% identical amino
acids, respectively, to the SodA from Mycobacterium smegmatis strain MC(2) 155
and Micrococcus luteus NCTC 2665. As revealed by activity staining experiments
with the wild type and the disruption mutant of G. polyisoprenivorans, this
bacterium harbors only one active SOD belonging to the manganese family. The
N-terminal sequences of the extracellular SodA proteins of both Gordonia species 
showed no evidence of leader peptides for the mature proteins, like the
intracellular SodA protein of G. polyisoprenivorans VH2, which was purified under
native conditions from the cells. In G. westfalica Kb1 and G. polyisoprenivorans 
VH2, SodA probably provides protection against reactive oxygen intermediates
which occur during degradation of poly(cis-1,4-isoprene).

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01490-08 
PMCID: PMC2607186
PMID: 18952871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Free Radic Res. 2005 Nov;39(11):1173-82.

Up-expression of NapA and other oxidative stress proteins is a compensatory
response to loss of major Helicobacter pylori stress resistance factors.

Olczak AA(1), Wang G, Maier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, 30602, USA.

Twenty-six Helicobacter pylori targeted mutant strains with deficiencies in
oxidative stress combating proteins, including 12 double mutant strains were
analyzed via physiological and proteomic approaches to distinguish the major
expression changes caused by the mutations. Mutations were introduced into both a
Mtz(S) and a Mtz(R) strain background. Most of the mutations caused increased
growth sensitivity of the strains to oxygen, and they all exhibited clear
compensatory up-expression of oxidative stress resistance proteins enabling
survival of the bacterium. The most frequent up-expressed oxidative stress
resistance factor (observed in 16 of the mutants) was the iron-sequestering
protein NapA, linking iron sequestration with oxidative stress resistance. The
up-expression of individual proteins in mutants ranged from 2 to 10 fold that of 
the wild type strain, even when incubated in a low O(2) environment. For example,
a considerably higher level of catalase expression (4 fold of that in the
wild-type strain) was observed in ahpC napA and ahpC sodB double mutants. A Fur
mutant up-expressed ferritin (Pfr) protein 20-fold. In some mutant strains the
bacterial DNA is protected from oxidative stress damage apparently via
overexpression of oxidative stress-combating proteins such as NapA, catalase or
MdaB (an NADPH quinone reductase). Our results show that H. pylori has a variety 
of ways to compensate for loss of major oxidative stress combating factors.

DOI: 10.1080/10715760500306729 
PMID: 16298743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2005 Oct;187(20):6962-71.

Effect of RyhB small RNA on global iron use in Escherichia coli.

Massé E(1), Vanderpool CK, Gottesman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. eric.masse@usherbrooke.ca

Comment in
    J Bacteriol. 2005 Oct;187(20):6870-3.

RyhB is a noncoding RNA regulated by the Fur repressor. It has previously been
shown to cause the rapid degradation of a number of mRNAs that encode proteins
that utilize iron. Here we examine the effect of ectopic RyhB production on
global gene expression by microarray analysis. Many of the previously identified 
targets were found, as well as other mRNAs encoding iron-binding proteins,
bringing the total number of regulated operons to at least 18, encoding 56 genes.
The two major operons involved in Fe-S cluster assembly showed different
behavior; the isc operon appears to be a direct target of RyhB action, while the 
suf operon does not. This is consistent with previous findings suggesting that
the suf genes but not the isc genes are important for Fe-S cluster synthesis
under iron-limiting conditions, presumably for essential iron-binding proteins.
In addition, we observed repression of Fur-regulated genes upon RyhB expression, 
interpreted as due to intracellular iron sparing resulting from reduced synthesis
of iron-binding proteins. Our results demonstrate the broad effects of a single
noncoding RNA on iron homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.20.6962-6971.2005 
PMCID: PMC1251601
PMID: 16199566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (wza)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7013-20.

The RcsAB box. Characterization of a new operator essential for the regulation of
exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in enteric bacteria.

Wehland M(1), Bernhard F.

Author information: 
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Kristallographie, Takustrasse 6,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.

The interaction of the two transcriptional regulators RcsA and RcsB with a
specific operator is a common mechanism in the activation of capsule biosynthesis
in enteric bacteria. We describe RcsAB binding sites in the wza promoter of the
operon for colanic acid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli K-12, in the galF
promoter of the operon for K2 antigen biosynthesis in Klebsiella pneumoniae, and 
in the tviA (vipR) promoter of the operon for Vi antigen biosynthesis in
Salmonella typhi. We further show the interaction of RcsAB with the rcsA
promoters of various species, indicating that rcsA autoregulation also depends on
the presence of both proteins. The compilation of all identified RcsAB binding
sites revealed the conserved core sequence TaAGaatatTCctA, which we propose to be
termed RcsAB box. The RcsAB box is also part of Bordetella pertussis BvgA binding
sites and may represent a more distributed recognition motif within the LuxR
superfamily of transcriptional regulators. The RcsAB box is essential for the
induction of Rcs-regulated promoters. Site-specific mutations of conserved
nucleotides in the RcsAB boxes of the E. coli wza and rcsA promoters resulted in 
an exopolysaccharide-negative phenotype and in the reduction of reporter gene
expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7013 
PMID: 10702265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (nlpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Arch Microbiol. 2000 Oct;174(4):292-5.

Molecular characterization of the Sinorhizobium meliloti nlpD gene.

Streit WR(1), Hofmann K, Liebl W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Genetik der Universität Göttingen, Germany.
wstreit@gwdg.de

The Sinorhizobium meliloti nlpD gene consists of 1,539 nucleotides and codes for 
512 amino acids. Expression of the nlpD gene as a histidine-tagged protein in
Escherichia coli resulted in the production of a 57-kDa protein. The deduced
polypeptide sequence of NlpD contains one unusual hexamer repeat (KVQRGQ), one
tetramer (TVTV) and two direct and inverted trimer repeats (KAA, AAK). The
N-terminal amino acid residues displayed similarity with signal peptides of
secreted bacterial lipoproteins. Mutations of the S. meliloti nlpD gene caused
decreased survival of cells in the stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1007/s002030000205 
PMID: 11081798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (degQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. EMBO J. 2018 Apr 13;37(8). pii: e97825. doi: 10.15252/embj.201797825. Epub 2018
Mar 7.

Transmembrane redox control and proteolysis of PdeC, a novel type of c-di-GMP
phosphodiesterase.

Herbst S(1), Lorkowski M(1), Sarenko O(1), Nguyen TKL(1), Jaenicke T(1), Hengge
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie/Mikrobiologie, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany regine.hengge@hu-berlin.de.

The nucleotide second messenger c-di-GMP nearly ubiquitously promotes bacterial
biofilm formation, with enzymes that synthesize and degrade c-di-GMP being
controlled by diverse N-terminal sensor domains. Here, we describe a novel class 
of widely occurring c-di-GMP phosphodiesterases (PDE) that feature a periplasmic 
"CSS domain" with two highly conserved cysteines that is flanked by two
transmembrane regions (TM1 and TM2) and followed by a cytoplasmic EAL domain with
PDE activity. Using PdeC, one of the five CSS domain PDEs of Escherichia coli
K-12, we show that DsbA/DsbB-promoted disulfide bond formation in the CSS domain 
reduces PDE activity. By contrast, the free thiol form is enzymatically highly
active, with the TM2 region promoting dimerization. Moreover, this form is
processed by periplasmic proteases DegP and DegQ, yielding a highly active
TM2 + EAL fragment that is slowly removed by further proteolysis. Similar redox
control and proteolysis was also observed for a second CSS domain PDE, PdeB. At
the physiological level, CSS domain PDEs modulate production and supracellular
architecture of extracellular matrix polymers in the deeper layers of mature
E. coli biofilms.

© 2018 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201797825 
PMCID: PMC5897775
PMID: 29514851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Vaccine. 2009 Jun 19;27(30):4047-55. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.04.023. Epub
2009 Apr 25.

Construction of an attenuated Pseudomonas fluorescens strain and evaluation of
its potential as a cross-protective vaccine.

Wang HR(1), Hu YH, Zhang WW, Sun L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR
China.

Ferric uptake regulator (Fur) is a global transcription regulator that is
ubiquitous to Gram-negative bacteria and regulates diverse biological processes, 
including iron uptake, cellular metabolism, stress response, and production of
virulence determinants. As a result, for many pathogenic bacteria, Fur plays a
crucial role in the course of infection and disease development. In this study,
the fur gene was cloned from a pathogenic Pseudomonas fluorescens strain, TSS,
isolated from diseased Japanese flounder cultured in a local farm. TSS Fur can
partially complement the defective phenotype of an Escherichia coli fur mutant. A
TSS fur null mutant, TFM, was constructed. Compared to TSS, TFM exhibits reduced 
growth ability, aberrant production of outer membrane proteins, decreased
resistance against host serum bactericidal activity, impaired ability to
disseminate in host blood and tissues, and drastic attenuation in overall
bacterial virulence in a Japanese flounder infection model. When used as a live
vaccine administered via the injection, immersion, and oral routes, TFM affords
high levels of protection upon Japanese flounder against not only P. fluorescens 
infection but also Aeromonas hydrophila infection. Furthermore, a plasmid, pJAQ, 
was constructed, which expresses the coding element of the Vibrio harveyi antigen
AgaV-DegQ. TFM harboring pJAQ can secret AgaV-DegQ into the extracellular milieu.
Vaccination of Japanese flounder with live TFM/pJAQ elicited strong
immunoprotection against both V. harveyi and A. hydrophila infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.04.023 
PMID: 19501788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Aug;143 ( Pt 8):2769-2774. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-8-2769.

Analysis of the Bacillus subtilis genome: cloning and nucleotide sequence of a 62
kb region between 275 degrees (rrnB) and 284 degrees (pai).

Oudega B(1), Koningstein G(1), Rodrigues L(1), de Sales Ramon M(1), Hilbert H(2),
Düsterhöft A(2), Pohl TM(3), Weitzenegger T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Institute of Molecular Biological
Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, Faculty of Biology, Vrije Universiteit, De
Boelelaan 1087, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Qiagen GmbH, Max-Volmer Strasse 4, D-40724 Hilden, Germany.
(3)Gesellschaft für Analyse-Technik und Consulting GmbH, Fritz-Arnold Strasse 23,
D-78467 Konstanz, Germany.

In the framework of the international project aimed at the sequencing of the
Bacillus subtilis genome, five DNA fragments in the region between rrnB (275
degrees) and pai (284 degrees) were cloned by inverse and combinatorial
long-range PCR and their nucleotide sequences were determined and analysed.
Together these sequences constituted a contig of 62229 bp. On the basis of the
position of Not1 and Stil restriction sites, the orientation and order of known
genetic markers was determined to be pai (284 degrees)-degQ comQ comP comAA
comAB-pbpD-kapB kinB patB-mcpB tipA mcpA tipB-rrnB (275 degrees). Fifty-four ORFs
were detected. Thirteen of these coincided with known B. subtilis genes, and 41
new ORFs were found. Of the predicted new gene products, 12 showed no significant
similarity to other known proteins, whereas ten showed strong similarity to
proteins of other organisms with unknown function. Nineteen predicted proteins
showed strong similarity to known proteins of other organisms, for instance a
Na+/H+ antiporter system of Bacillus alcalophilus, a sugar transport system found
in Mycoplasma genitalium, NADH-dependent butanol dehydrogenase of Clostridium
acetobutylicum, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase A of B, subtilis,
exo-1,4-alpha-glucosidase activity of Bacillus stearothermophilus and L-rhamnose 
isomerase of Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-8-2769 
PMID: 9274030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (nirB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 1992 Nov;6(22):3395-404.

The Rhizobium leguminosarum FnrN protein is functionally similar to Escherichia
coli Fnr and promotes heterologous oxygen-dependent activation of transcription.

Schlüter A(1), Patschkowski T, Unden G, Priefer UB.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

An open reading frame from Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae strain VF39,
previously identified and found to be similar to Escherichia coli fnr and
Rhizobium meliloti fixK (orf240, thereafter called fnrN), was further analysed.
Analysis of the expression of an fnrN-lacZ transcriptional fusion revealed that
fnrN is preferentially expressed under oxygen limitation. Using R. meliloti
fixN-lacZ fusions it was shown that the fnrN gene product only mediates
transcriptional activation under microaerobiosis, indicating that the FnrN
protein responds, directly or indirectly, to oxygen. Plasmids which expressed
fnrN under the control of an E. coli promoter were able to complement an E. coli 
fnr mutant with respect to anaerobic growth on nitrate but not fumarate, and to
promote anaerobic but not aerobic activation of the Fnr-dependent E. coli genes
narGHJI, nirB and fdnGHI coding for nitrate reductase, NADH-dependent nitrite
reductase and formate dehydrogenase-N, respectively. Fumarate and DMSO reductase 
activities were not induced by FnrN. The E. coli fnr gene substituted for fnrN in
oxygen-regulated transcription of nirB- and fixN-lacZ fusions in R.
leguminosarum. The results indicate that Fnr and FnrN are functionally very
similar and share a common mode of oxygen-dependent transcriptional activation.
From hybridization studies, it appeared that fnrN-like genes are present in a
number of different R. leguminosarum strains.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1992.tb02207.x 
PMID: 1484491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (nirD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Mar;183(5):1663-71.

Role of the Tat ransport system in nitrous oxide reductase translocation and
cytochrome cd1 biosynthesis in Pseudomonas stutzeri.

Heikkilä MP(1), Honisch U, Wunsch P, Zumft WG.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Karlsruhe, D-76128 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

By transforming N2O to N2, the multicopper enzyme nitrous oxide reductase
provides a periplasmic electron sink for a respiratory chain that is part of
denitrification. The signal sequence of the enzyme carries the heptameric
twin-arginine consensus motif characteristic of the Tat pathway. We have
identified tat genes of Pseudomonas stutzeri and functionally analyzed the
unlinked tatC and tatE loci. A tatC mutant retained N2O reductase in the
cytoplasm in the unprocessed form and lacking the metal cofactors. This is
contrary to viewing the Tat system as specific only for fully assembled proteins.
A C618V exchange in the electron transfer center CuA rendered the enzyme largely 
incompetent for transport. The location of the mutation in the C-terminal domain 
of N(2)O reductase implies that the Tat system acts on a completely synthesized
protein and is sensitive to a late structural variation in folding. By generating
a tatE mutant and a reductase-overproducing strain, we show a function for TatE
in N2O reductase translocation. Further, we have found that the Tat and Sec
pathways have to cooperate to produce a functional nitrite reductase system. The 
cytochrome cd1 nitrite reductase was found in the periplasm of the tatC mutant,
suggesting export by the Sec pathway; however, the enzyme lacked the heme D1
macrocycle. The NirD protein as part of a complex required for heme D1 synthesis 
or processing carries a putative Tat signal peptide. Since NO reduction was also 
inhibited in the tatC mutant, the Tat protein translocation system is necessary
in multiple ways for establishing anaerobic nitrite denitrification.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.5.1663-1671.2001 
PMCID: PMC95051
PMID: 11160097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rpmG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biochimie. 1991 Jul-Aug;73(7-8):855-60.

Characterization and primary structure of proteins L28, L33 and L34 from Bacillus
stearothermophilus ribosomes.

Kruft V(1), Kapp U, Wittmann-Liebold B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of 3 proteins from the 50S subunit of Bacillus 
stearothermophilus ribosomes were determined by N-terminal sequence analysis and 
by sequencing of overlapping fragments obtained from enzymatic digestions and
chemical cleavages. The proteins BstL28, BstL33 and BstL34, named according to
the equivalent proteins in Escherichia coli ribosomes, consist of 60, 49, and 44 
amino acid residues and have calculated molecular masses of 6811.0, 5908.6, and
5253.9 Da, respectively. They are highly basic with a content of positively
charged residues ranging between 29% for L33 and 45% for L34. The 3 proteins were
positioned in the 2-dimensional map of B stearothermophilus 50S ribosomal
proteins. The electrophoretic mobilities confirm sizes and net charges deduced
from the sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90126-l 
PMID: 1742360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEBS Lett. 1988 Nov 21;240(1-2):21-8.

The primary structures of ribosomal proteins L16, L23 and L33 from the
archaebacterium Halobacterium marismortui.

Hatakeyama T(1), Hatakeyama T, Kimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of ribosomal proteins L16, L23 and L33 from the
archaebacterium Halobacterium marismortui were determined. The sequences were
established by manual sequencing of peptides produced with several proteases as
well as by cleavage with dilute HCl. Proteins L16, L23 and L33 consist of 119,
154 and 69 amino acid residues, and their molecular masses are 13,538, 16,812 and
7620 Da, respectively. The comparison of their sequences with those of ribosomal 
proteins from other organisms revealed that L23 and L33 are related to
eubacterial ribosomal proteins from Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, while protein L16 was found to be homologous to a eukaryotic 
ribosomal protein from yeast. These results provide information about the special
phylogenetic position of archaebacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(88)80333-8 
PMID: 3191994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rpmB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biochimie. 1991 Jul-Aug;73(7-8):855-60.

Characterization and primary structure of proteins L28, L33 and L34 from Bacillus
stearothermophilus ribosomes.

Kruft V(1), Kapp U, Wittmann-Liebold B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abteilung Wittmann, Berlin,
Germany.

The complete amino acid sequences of 3 proteins from the 50S subunit of Bacillus 
stearothermophilus ribosomes were determined by N-terminal sequence analysis and 
by sequencing of overlapping fragments obtained from enzymatic digestions and
chemical cleavages. The proteins BstL28, BstL33 and BstL34, named according to
the equivalent proteins in Escherichia coli ribosomes, consist of 60, 49, and 44 
amino acid residues and have calculated molecular masses of 6811.0, 5908.6, and
5253.9 Da, respectively. They are highly basic with a content of positively
charged residues ranging between 29% for L33 and 45% for L34. The 3 proteins were
positioned in the 2-dimensional map of B stearothermophilus 50S ribosomal
proteins. The electrophoretic mobilities confirm sizes and net charges deduced
from the sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90126-l 
PMID: 1742360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (mioC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2000 May;36(3):557-69.

Analysis of the DNA-binding domain of Escherichia coli DnaA protein.

Blaesing F(1), Weigel C, Welzeck M, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195
Berlin-Dahlem, Germany.

The DNA-binding domain of the Escherichia coli DnaA protein is represented by the
94 C-terminal amino acids (domain 4, aa 374-467). The isolated DNA-binding domain
acts as a functional repressor in vivo, as monitored with a mioC:lacZ
translational fusion integrated into the chromosome of the indicator strain. In
order to identify residues required for specific DNA binding, site-directed and
random PCR mutagenesis were performed, using the mioC:lacZ construct for
selection. Mutations defective in DNA binding were found all over the DNA-binding
domain with some clustering in the basic loop region, within presumptive helix B 
and in a highly conserved region at the N-terminus of presumptive helix C.
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis revealed different binding classes of
mutant proteins. No or severely reduced binding activity was demonstrated for
amino acid substitutions at positions R399, R407, Q408, H434, T435, T436 and
A440. Altered binding specificity was found for mutations in a 12 residue region 
close to the N-terminus of helix C. The defects of the classical temperature
sensitive mutants dnaA204, dnaA205 and dnaA211 result from instability of the
proteins at higher temperatures. dnaX suppressors dnaA71 and dnaA721 map to the
region close to helix C and bind DNA non-specifically.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01881.x 
PMID: 10844646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 1988 Dec 20;73(2):347-54.

Termination of the Escherichia coli asnC transcript. The DnaA protein/dnaA box
complex blocks transcribing RNA polymerase.

Schaefer C(1), Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, F.R.G.

Genes clockwise of oriC, the Escherichia coli replication origin
(oriC-mioC-asnC), show anticlockwise transcription. The intergenic region between
mioC and asnC contains both a terminator and a consensus DnaA-protein-binding
site (dnaA box). We analysed termination in this region using galK expression to 
monitor for transcription. About 50% of the asnC transcripts were not terminated,
and about 25% terminated at the asnC terminator. We found that the DnaA
protein/dnaA box complex acts as a terminator of transcription for about 25% of
the transcripts. Its efficiency could be increased by raising the level of DnaA
protein, or it could be inactivated by deletion in the dnaA box or by thermal
denaturation of the DnaA protein.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90499-4 
PMID: 2854096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Nov;214(3):474-81.

Transcription in the region of the replication origin, oriC, of Escherichia coli:
termination of asnC transcripts.

Gielow A(1), Kücherer C, Kölling R, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Federal Republic of
Germany.

Transcription from the asnC promoter was found to proceed through the replication
origin, oriC, into the gidA gene of Escherichia coli. Between 10% and 20% of asnC
transcripts reached oriC in vivo. Termination sites in the intergenic region
between asnC and mioC and within mioC were determined in vivo and in vitro using 
S1 mapping. Only about 10% of the transcripts terminated at the asnC terminator
in vivo. DnaA protein dependent termination was observed close to the binding
site, dnaA box, for DnaA protein. In the in vitro replication system asnC
transcripts did not reach oriC, suggesting that asnC transcripts are not involved
in the initiation of replication, contrary to mioC transcripts. We suggest that
oriC and mioC might have been transposed during evolution into an asnC
regulation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00330483 
PMID: 2464126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Apr;212(1):99-104.

AsnC, a multifunctional regulator of genes located around the replication origin 
of Escherichia coli, oriC.

Kölling R(1), Gielow A, Seufert W, Kücherer C, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik, Berlin.

The expression of the gidA gene which is located immediately counterclockwise of 
the replication origin of Escherichia coli, oriC, was found to be negatively
regulated by the AsnC protein in an in vitro transcription-translation system.
This effect is not due to simple repression of transcription originating at the
gidA promoter, because the AsnC protein did not change the level of gidA promoter
dependent transcription as analysed by promoter-galK fusions and by S1 mapping.
From these data we conclude that the AsnC protein controls gidA gene expression
at a post-transcriptional level. gidA is the third gene in the oriC region,
besides asnA and asnC, whose expression is under AsnC control. However, the
mechanisms involved are different: regulation of transcription in the case of
asnA and asnC and post-transcriptional control of gidA. The gidA promoter was
mapped by deletion analysis and by S1 mapping. We defined two regions that affect
promoter activity negatively. Additional transcripts, regulated by AsnC, started 
more than 300 bp upstream of the gidA promoter and were found to enter the gidA
region. These transcripts, originating either at the mioC and/or the ansC
promoter traverse the replication origin.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00322450 
PMID: 2836709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 1988 Feb 25;263(6):2719-23.

Functionality of the dnaA protein binding site in DNA replication is
orientation-dependent.

Seufert W(1), Dobrinski B, Lurz R, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, West Germany.

We analyzed the functionality of different dnaA protein binding sites by assaying
in vitro dnaA-dependent replication of pBR322 derivatives. Single dnaA sites from
oriC and from the mioC and dnaA gene promoters were active when combined with the
primer generating element of pBR322 in a proper distance. Prereplisome assembly
did not require sequences in addition to the 9-base pair consensus dnaA binding
site. Inversion of the structurally asymmetric dnaA site relative to its
orientation in wild type pBR322 resulted in a marked reduction in replication
efficiency, as observed with five different dnaA sites studied. The direction of 
DNA replication was not affected.


PMID: 2830261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (asnC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Nov;177(22):6432-9.

Expression of the putA gene encoding proline dehydrogenase from Rhodobacter
capsulatus is independent of NtrC regulation but requires an Lrp-like activator
protein.

Keuntje B(1), Masepohl B, Klipp W.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Bielefeld, Germany.

Four Rhodobacter capsulatus mutants unable to grow with proline as the sole
nitrogen source were isolated by random Tn5 mutagenesis. The Tn5 insertions were 
mapped within two adjacent chromosomal EcoRI fragments. DNA sequence analysis of 
this region revealed three open reading frames designated selD, putR, and putA.
The putA gene codes for a protein of 1,127 amino acid residues which is
homologous to PutA of Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli. The central
part of R. capsulatus PutA showed homology to proline dehydrogenase of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Put1) and Drosophila melanogaster (SlgA). The
C-terminal part of PutA exhibited homology to Put2 (pyrroline-5-carboxylate
dehydrogenase) of S. cerevisiae and to aldehyde dehydrogenases from different
organisms. Therefore, it seems likely that in R. capsulatus, as in enteric
bacteria, both enzymatic steps for proline degradation are catalyzed by a single 
polypeptide (PutA). The deduced amino acid sequence of PutR (154 amino acid
residues) showed homology to the small regulatory proteins Lrp, BkdR, and AsnC.
The putR gene, which is divergently transcribed from putA, is essential for
proline utilization and codes for an activator of putA expression. The expression
of putA was induced by proline and was not affected by ammonia or other amino
acids. In addition, putA expression was autoregulated by PutA itself. Mutations
in glnB, nifR1 (ntrC), and NifR4 (ntrA encoding sigma 54) had no influence on put
gene expression. The open reading frame located downstream of R. capsulatus putR 
exhibited strong homology to the E. coli selD gene, which is involved in selenium
metabolism. R. capsulatus selD mutants exhibited a Put+ phenotype, demonstrating 
that selD is required neither for viability nor for proline utilization.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.22.6432-6439.1995 
PMCID: PMC177492
PMID: 7592417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 1988 Dec 20;73(2):347-54.

Termination of the Escherichia coli asnC transcript. The DnaA protein/dnaA box
complex blocks transcribing RNA polymerase.

Schaefer C(1), Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, F.R.G.

Genes clockwise of oriC, the Escherichia coli replication origin
(oriC-mioC-asnC), show anticlockwise transcription. The intergenic region between
mioC and asnC contains both a terminator and a consensus DnaA-protein-binding
site (dnaA box). We analysed termination in this region using galK expression to 
monitor for transcription. About 50% of the asnC transcripts were not terminated,
and about 25% terminated at the asnC terminator. We found that the DnaA
protein/dnaA box complex acts as a terminator of transcription for about 25% of
the transcripts. Its efficiency could be increased by raising the level of DnaA
protein, or it could be inactivated by deletion in the dnaA box or by thermal
denaturation of the DnaA protein.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90499-4 
PMID: 2854096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Nov;214(3):474-81.

Transcription in the region of the replication origin, oriC, of Escherichia coli:
termination of asnC transcripts.

Gielow A(1), Kücherer C, Kölling R, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Federal Republic of
Germany.

Transcription from the asnC promoter was found to proceed through the replication
origin, oriC, into the gidA gene of Escherichia coli. Between 10% and 20% of asnC
transcripts reached oriC in vivo. Termination sites in the intergenic region
between asnC and mioC and within mioC were determined in vivo and in vitro using 
S1 mapping. Only about 10% of the transcripts terminated at the asnC terminator
in vivo. DnaA protein dependent termination was observed close to the binding
site, dnaA box, for DnaA protein. In the in vitro replication system asnC
transcripts did not reach oriC, suggesting that asnC transcripts are not involved
in the initiation of replication, contrary to mioC transcripts. We suggest that
oriC and mioC might have been transposed during evolution into an asnC
regulation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00330483 
PMID: 2464126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Apr;212(1):99-104.

AsnC, a multifunctional regulator of genes located around the replication origin 
of Escherichia coli, oriC.

Kölling R(1), Gielow A, Seufert W, Kücherer C, Messer W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik, Berlin.

The expression of the gidA gene which is located immediately counterclockwise of 
the replication origin of Escherichia coli, oriC, was found to be negatively
regulated by the AsnC protein in an in vitro transcription-translation system.
This effect is not due to simple repression of transcription originating at the
gidA promoter, because the AsnC protein did not change the level of gidA promoter
dependent transcription as analysed by promoter-galK fusions and by S1 mapping.
From these data we conclude that the AsnC protein controls gidA gene expression
at a post-transcriptional level. gidA is the third gene in the oriC region,
besides asnA and asnC, whose expression is under AsnC control. However, the
mechanisms involved are different: regulation of transcription in the case of
asnA and asnC and post-transcriptional control of gidA. The gidA promoter was
mapped by deletion analysis and by S1 mapping. We defined two regions that affect
promoter activity negatively. Additional transcripts, regulated by AsnC, started 
more than 300 bp upstream of the gidA promoter and were found to enter the gidA
region. These transcripts, originating either at the mioC and/or the ansC
promoter traverse the replication origin.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00322450 
PMID: 2836709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (rplL)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Apr 1;69(1):1-12.

L7 protein is a coregulator of vitamin D receptor-retinoid X receptor-mediated
transactivation.

Berghöfer-Hochheimer Y(1), Zurek C, Wölfl S, Hemmerich P, Munder T.

Author information: 
(1)Hans-Knöll-Institut für Naturstoff-Forschung e.V., Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Jena, Germany.

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) heterodimerizes with the retinoid X receptor (RXR)
and requires additional protein-protein interactions to regulate the expression
of target genes. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified the previously 
described protein L7, that specifically interacted with the VDR in the presence
of vitamin D. Deletion analysis indicated, that the N-terminus of L7, which
harbours a basic region leucine zipper like domain, mediated interaction with the
VDR. Binding assays with purified GST-L7 demonstrated, that L7 specifically
pulled down the VDR, that was either expressed in yeast or endogenously contained
in the cell line U937. Interestingly, L7 inhibited ligand-dependent VDR-RXR
heterodimerization, when constitutively expressed in yeast. We also demonstrate
that L7 repressed binding of VDR-RXR heterodimers to a vitamin D response
element. Surprisingly, L7 recruited RXR to the same response element in the
presence of 9-cis retinoic acid. Ligand-dependent protein-protein interaction in 
the yeast two-hybrid system confirmed, that binding of L7 also was targeted at
the RXR. Our data suggest, that protein L7 is a coregulator of VDR-RXR mediated
transactivation of genes, that modulates transcriptional activity by interfering 
with binding of the receptors to genomic enhancer elements.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4644(19980401)69:1<1::aid-jcb1>3.0.co;2-x 
PMID: 9513041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochimie. 1991 Jun;73(6):797-804.

The binding site of ribosomal protein L10 in eubacteria and archaebacteria is
conserved: reconstitution of chimeric 50S subunits.

Stöffler-Meilicke M(1), Stöffler G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt Wittmann, Berlin, Dahlem,
Germany.

It has been shown by electron microscopy that the selective removal of the stalk 
from 50S ribosomal subunits of two representative archaebacteria, namely
Methanococcus vaniellii and Sulfolobus solfataricus, is accompanied by loss of
the archaebacterial L10 and L12 proteins. The stalk was reformed if
archaebacterial core particles were reconstituted with their corresponding split 
proteins. Next, structurally intact chimeric 50S subunits have been reconstituted
in vitro by addition of Escherichia coli ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/L12 to 50S
core particles from M vaniellii or S solfataricus, respectively. In the reverse
experiment, using core particles from E coli and split proteins from M vaniellii,
stalk-bearing 50S particles were also obtained. Analysis of the reconstituted 50S
subunits by immunoblotting revealed that E coli L10 was incorporated into
archaebacterial core particles in both presence or absence of E coli L7/L12. In
contrast, incorporation of E coli L7/L12 into archaebacterial cores was only
possible in the presence of E coli L10. Our results suggest that in
archaebacteria - as in E coli - the stalk is formed by archaebacterial L12
proteins that bind to the ribosome via L10. The structural equivalence of
eubacterial and archaebacterial L10 and L12 proteins has thus for the first time 
been established. The chimeric reconstitution experiments provide evidence that
the domain of protein L10 that interacts with the ribosomal particle is highly
conserved between eubacteria and archaebacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(91)90059-a 
PMID: 1764524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fur) AND (uof)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 21;26(4):965-75. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Control of Fur synthesis by the non-coding RNA RyhB and iron-responsive decoding.

Vecerek B(1), Moll I, Bläsi U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Max F Perutz Laboratories,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The Fe2+-dependent Fur protein serves as a negative regulator of iron uptake in
bacteria. As only metallo-Fur acts as an autogeneous repressor, Fe2+scarcity
would direct fur expression when continued supply is not obviously required. We
show that in Escherichia coli post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms ensure
that Fur synthesis remains steady in iron limitation. Our studies revealed that
fur translation is coupled to that of an upstream open reading frame (uof),
translation of which is downregulated by the non-coding RNA (ncRNA) RyhB. As RyhB
transcription is negatively controlled by metallo-Fur, iron depletion creates a
negative feedback loop. RyhB-mediated regulation of uof-fur provides the first
example for indirect translational regulation by a trans-encoded ncRNA. In
addition, we present evidence for an iron-responsive decoding mechanism of the
uof-fur entity. It could serve as a backup mechanism of the RyhB circuitry, and
represents the first link between iron availability and synthesis of an
iron-containing protein.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601553 
PMCID: PMC1852835
PMID: 17268550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (leuD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Apr;243(1):24-31.

The NlaIV restriction and modification genes of Neisseria lactamica are flanked
by leucine biosynthesis genes.

Lau PC(1), Forghani F, Labbé D, Bergeron H, Brousseau R, Höltke HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, National Research Council of Canada,
Montreal, Quebec.

Erratum in
    Mol Gen Genet 1994 Jul 25;244(2):167.

The genes encoding the Neisseria lactamica restriction endonuclease IV (R.NlaIV) 
and its cognate DNA methyltransferase (M.NlaIV), both of which recognize the
sequence GGNNCC, have been cloned in Escherichia coli and overexpressed using the
T7 polymerase/promoter system. Analysis of a sequenced 3.58 kb fragment
established the gene order, leuD-M.NlaIV-R.NlaIV-leuB. The predicted primary
sequence of M.NlaIV (423 amino acids) shows the highest degree of identity to a
pair of cytosine-specific methyltransferases, M.BanI (44.9%) and M.HgiCI (44.3%),
which recognize the sequence GGYRCC (Y, pyrimidines; R, purines). In contrast,
the R.NlaIV protein sequence (243 amino acids) is unique in the existing
data-base, a situation that holds for most endonucleases. Flanking the NlaIV
modification and restriction genes are homologues of the leuD and leuB genes of
enteric bacteria, which code for enzymes in the leucine biosynthesis pathway.
This gene context implies a possible new mode of gene regulation for the RM.NlaIV
system, which would involve a mechanism similar to the recently discovered
leucine/Lrp regulon in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00283872 
PMID: 8190068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (leuB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Apr;243(1):24-31.

The NlaIV restriction and modification genes of Neisseria lactamica are flanked
by leucine biosynthesis genes.

Lau PC(1), Forghani F, Labbé D, Bergeron H, Brousseau R, Höltke HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, National Research Council of Canada,
Montreal, Quebec.

Erratum in
    Mol Gen Genet 1994 Jul 25;244(2):167.

The genes encoding the Neisseria lactamica restriction endonuclease IV (R.NlaIV) 
and its cognate DNA methyltransferase (M.NlaIV), both of which recognize the
sequence GGNNCC, have been cloned in Escherichia coli and overexpressed using the
T7 polymerase/promoter system. Analysis of a sequenced 3.58 kb fragment
established the gene order, leuD-M.NlaIV-R.NlaIV-leuB. The predicted primary
sequence of M.NlaIV (423 amino acids) shows the highest degree of identity to a
pair of cytosine-specific methyltransferases, M.BanI (44.9%) and M.HgiCI (44.3%),
which recognize the sequence GGYRCC (Y, pyrimidines; R, purines). In contrast,
the R.NlaIV protein sequence (243 amino acids) is unique in the existing
data-base, a situation that holds for most endonucleases. Flanking the NlaIV
modification and restriction genes are homologues of the leuD and leuB genes of
enteric bacteria, which code for enzymes in the leucine biosynthesis pathway.
This gene context implies a possible new mode of gene regulation for the RM.NlaIV
system, which would involve a mechanism similar to the recently discovered
leucine/Lrp regulon in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00283872 
PMID: 8190068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (leuA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7797-802. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for the production of L-valine based on
transcriptome analysis and in silico gene knockout simulation.

Park JH(1), Lee KH, Kim TY, Lee SY.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic and Biomolecular Engineering National Research Laboratory,
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 program), Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Korea.

The L-valine production strain of Escherichia coli was constructed by rational
metabolic engineering and stepwise improvement based on transcriptome analysis
and gene knockout simulation of the in silico genome-scale metabolic network.
Feedback inhibition of acetohydroxy acid synthase isoenzyme III by L-valine was
removed by site-directed mutagenesis, and the native promoter containing the
transcriptional attenuator leader regions of the ilvGMEDA and ilvBN operon was
replaced with the tac promoter. The ilvA, leuA, and panB genes were deleted to
make more precursors available for L-valine biosynthesis. This engineered Val
strain harboring a plasmid overexpressing the ilvBN genes produced 1.31 g/liter
L-valine. Comparative transcriptome profiling was performed during batch
fermentation of the engineered and control strains. Among the down-regulated
genes, the lrp and ygaZH genes, which encode a global regulator Lrp and L-valine 
exporter, respectively, were overexpressed. Amplification of the lrp, ygaZH, and 
lrp-ygaZH genes led to the enhanced production of L-valine by 21.6%, 47.1%, and
113%, respectively. Further improvement was achieved by using in silico gene
knockout simulation, which identified the aceF, mdh, and pfkA genes as knockout
targets. The VAMF strain (Val DeltaaceF Deltamdh DeltapfkA) overexpressing the
ilvBN, ilvCED, ygaZH, and lrp genes was able to produce 7.55 g/liter L-valine
from 20 g/liter glucose in batch culture, resulting in a high yield of 0.378 g of
L-valine per gram of glucose. These results suggest that an industrially
competitive strain can be efficiently developed by metabolic engineering based on
combined rational modification, transcriptome profiling, and systems-level in
silico analysis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0702609104 
PMCID: PMC1857225
PMID: 17463081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (glyA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Jul;25(1):39-51.

Alterations in the flow of one-carbon units affect KinB-dependent sporulation in 
Bacillus subtilis.

Dartois V(1), Liu J, Hoch JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. vdartois@pasteur.fr

Endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis is primarily dependent on the
phosphorylation of the key transcription factor Spo0A by two major kinases, KinA 
and KinB, thought to be activated by distinct signals. Using a strategy designed 
to detect mutations that specifically affect the signalling pathway to KinB, we
have isolated a Tn10 insertion mutant in one of two adjacent lrp-like genes
coding for homologues of the Escherichia coli leucine-responsive regulatory
protein (Lrp) and another mutant in the glyA gene encoding the serine
hydroxymethyl transferase (SHMT). SHMT catalyses interconversion of serine and
glycine while transferring the resulting one-carbon unit into the C1 pool through
methylene tetrahydrofolate. Sporulation experiments performed in a series of
supplemented media indicated that the role of SHMT in the KinB pathway is to feed
the pool of C1 units recruited for the biosynthesis of key metabolites, which
include the methyl donor S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM). The results of experiments 
using L-ethionine suggest that SAM is involved in post-synthetic methylation
reactions or biosynthesis of metabolites that serve to activate KinB. Truncated
LrpA and LrpB peptides that have retained the DNA-binding domain but have lost
the C-terminal half of the protein appear to act as repressors of glyA
transcription and KinB-dependent sporulation. However, deletions of lrpA, lrpB or
lrpAB have little effect on glyA transcription or sporulation through KinB,
suggesting that other effectors, such as additional Lrp homologues, may act in
conjunction with LrpA and LrpB. Our results indicate that lrpA-lrpB together with
the biosynthetic glyA gene lie on a common signalling pathway meant to activate
the KinB sensor kinase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.4491805.x 
PMID: 11902725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochimie. 1994;76(10-11):1063-70.

The role of H-NS in one carbon metabolism.

Landgraf JR(1), Levinthal M, Danchin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, W Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA.

The H-NS protein of Escherichia coli regulates the expression of genes involved
in many general processes such as osmoregulation and virulence. More recently,
H-NS was shown to exert an effect on ilvIH gene expression in conjunction with
the leucine responsive regulatory protein (Lrp). We show that H-NS is involved in
the transcriptional regulation of the kbl/tdh operon, which is also Lrp
regulated. Insertional inactivation of the hns gene results in two-fold
derepression of the kbl/tdh operon. This level of expression is sufficient to
suppress the auxotrophic requirements imposed by a glyA mutation. We show that
expression of the kbl/tdh operon is temperature controlled and that this control 
is not mediated through H-NS action as has been shown for some other temperature 
controlled genes.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(94)90031-0 
PMID: 7748928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (csiR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Jan;70(Pt 1):97-100. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X13033128. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Cloning, overexpression, purification and preliminary X-ray analysis of a
feast/famine regulatory protein (Rv2779c) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv.

Dey A(1), Ramachandran R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Structural Biology Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, B.S/10/1, Sector-10, Jankipuram Extension, Sitapur Road, Lucknow 226
031, India.

Rv2779c from Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a feast/famine regulatory protein.
This class of proteins are also known as the leucine-responsive regulatory
protein/asparagine synthase C family (Lrp/AsnC) of transcriptional regulators and
are known to be involved in various metabolic processes in bacteria and fungi.
They contain a RAM (regulator of amino-acid metabolism) domain that is rarely
found in humans and acts as the oligomerization domain. Since the oligomeric
status is often linked to the particular functional role in these proteins,
binding of ligands to the domain can elicit specific functional responses.
Full-length Rv2779c corresponding to a molecular mass of 19.8 kDa and 179
residues was cloned and purified to homogeneity following transformation into
Escherichia coli C41 (DE3) cells. Crystals were grown by vapour diffusion using
the hanging-drop method. Diffraction data extending to 2.8 Å resolution were
collected from a single crystal that belonged to space group P2(1)2(1)2, with
unit-cell parameters a = 99.6, b = 146.0, c = 49.9 Å. Matthews coefficient (VM)
calculations suggest that four molecules are present in the asymmetric unit,
corresponding to a solvent content of ∼46%. Molecular-replacement calculations
using the crystal structure of a homologue, Rv3291c, as the search model gave an 
unambiguous solution corresponding to four subunits in the asymmetric unit.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X13033128 
PMCID: PMC3943104
PMID: 24419627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genome Res. 2006 May;16(5):644-55.

Genome-wide prediction of G4 DNA as regulatory motifs: role in Escherichia coli
global regulation.

Rawal P(1), Kummarasetti VB, Ravindran J, Kumar N, Halder K, Sharma R, Mukerji M,
Das SK, Chowdhury S.

Author information: 
(1)G.N. Ramachandran Knowledge Centre for Genome Informatics, Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

The role of nonlinear DNA in replication, recombination, and transcription has
become evident in recent years. Although several studies have predicted and
characterized regulatory elements at the sequence level, very few have
investigated DNA structure as regulatory motifs. Here, using G-quadruplex or G4
DNA motifs as a model, we have researched the role of DNA structure in
transcription on a genome-wide scale. Analyses of >61,000 open reading frames
(ORFs) across 18 prokaryotes show enrichment of G4 motifs in regulatory regions
and indicate its predominance within promoters of genes pertaining to
transcription, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and signal transduction. Based 
on this, we predict that G4 DNA may present regulatory signals. This is supported
by conserved G4 motifs in promoters of orthologous genes across phylogenetically 
distant organisms. We hypothesized a regulatory role of G4 DNA during
supercoiling stress, when duplex destabilization may result in G4 formation. This
is in line with our observations from target site analysis for 55 DNA-binding
proteins in Escherichia coli, which reveals significant (P<0.001) association of 
G4 motifs with target sites of global regulators FIS and Lrp and the sigma factor
RpoD (sigma70). These factors together control >1000 genes in the early growth
phase and are believed to be induced by supercoiled DNA. We also predict G4
motif-induced supercoiling sensitivity for >30 operons in E. coli, and our
findings implicate G4 DNA in DNA-topology-mediated global gene regulation in E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.4508806 
PMCID: PMC1457047
PMID: 16651665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (atpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2020 Jul 29;84(3). pii: e00030-17. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00030-17. Print 2020 Aug 19.

A Thermosensitive, Phase-Variable Epigenetic Switch: pap Revisited.

Zamora M(#)(1)(2), Ziegler CA(#)(3), Freddolino PL(3)(4), Wolfe AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Stritch School of Medicine, Health Sciences Division, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA
awolfe@luc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

It has been more than a decade since the last comprehensive review of the
phase-variable uropathogen-associated pyelonephritis-associated pilus (pap)
genetic switch. Since then, important data have come to light, including
additional factors that regulate pap expression, better characterization of H-NS 
regulation, the structure of the Lrp octamer in complex with pap regulatory DNA, 
the temperature-insensitive phenotype of a mutant lacking the acetyltransferase
RimJ, evidence that key components of the regulatory machinery are acetylated,
and new insights into the role of DNA binding by key regulators in shaping both
the physical structure and regulatory state of the papI and papBA promoters. This
review revisits pap, integrating these newer observations with older ones to
produce a new model for the concerted behavior of this virulence-regulatory
region.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00030-17 
PMCID: PMC7392537
PMID: 32727743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Infect Immun. 2016 Jan 11;84(3):811-21. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01302-15.

Regulation of Expression of Uropathogenic Escherichia coli Nonfimbrial Adhesin
TosA by PapB Homolog TosR in Conjunction with H-NS and Lrp.

Engstrom MD(1), Mobley HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA hmobley@umich.edu.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are a major burden to human health. The
overwhelming majority of UTIs are caused by uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC)
strains. Unlike some pathogens, UPEC strains do not have a fixed core set of
virulence and fitness factors but do have a variety of adhesins and regulatory
pathways. One such UPEC adhesin is the nonfimbrial adhesin TosA, which mediates
adherence to the epithelium of the upper urinary tract. The tos operon is AT
rich, resides on pathogenicity island aspV, and is not expressed under laboratory
conditions. Because of this, we hypothesized that tosA expression is silenced by 
H-NS. Lrp, based on its prominent function in the regulation of other adhesins,
is also hypothesized to contribute to tos operon regulation. Using a variety of
in vitro techniques, we mapped both the tos operon promoter and TosR binding
sites. We have now identified TosR as a dual regulator of the tos operon, which
could control the tos operon in association with H-NS and Lrp. H-NS is a negative
regulator of the tos operon, and Lrp positively regulates the tos operon.
Exogenous leucine also inhibits Lrp-mediated tos operon positive regulation. In
addition, TosR binds to the pap operon, which encodes another important UPEC
adhesin, P fimbria. Induction of TosR synthesis reduces production of P fimbria. 
These studies advance our knowledge of regulation of adhesin expression
associated with uropathogen colonization of a host.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01302-15 
PMCID: PMC4771353
PMID: 26755158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Dec;153(Pt 12):4138-4149. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/010363-0.

Comparative analysis of FimB and FimE recombinase activity.

Holden N(1), Blomfield IC(2), Uhlin BE(3), Totsika M(1), Kulasekara DH(4), Gally 
DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Diseases, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Medicine,
Chancellor's Building, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK.
(2)Biomedical Research Group, Department of Biosciences, University of Kent, Kent
CT2 7NJ, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, 1705 NE Pacific,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

FimB and FimE are site-specific recombinases, part of the lambda integrase
family, and invert a 314 bp DNA switch that controls the expression of type 1
fimbriae in Escherichia coli. FimB and FimE differ in their activity towards the 
fim switch, with FimB catalysing inversion in both directions in comparison to
the higher-frequency but unidirectional on-to-off recombination catalysed by
FimE. Previous work has demonstrated that FimB, but not FimE, recombination is
completely inhibited in vitro and in vivo by a regulator, PapB, expressed from a 
distinct fimbrial locus. The aim of this work was to investigate differences
between FimB and FimE activity by exploiting the differential inhibition
demonstrated by PapB. The research focused on genetic changes to the fim switch
that alter recombinase binding and its structural context. FimB and FimE still
recombined a switch in which the majority of fimS DNA was replaced with a larger 
region of non-fim DNA. This demonstrated a minimal requirement for FimB and FimE 
recombination of the Fim binding sites and associated inverted repeats. With the 
original leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) and integration host factor 
(IHF)-dependent structure removed, PapB was now able to inhibit both
recombinases. The relative affinities of FimB and FimE were determined for the
four 'half sites'. This analysis, along with the effect of extensive swaps and
duplications of the half sites on recombination frequency, demonstrated that FimB
recruitment and therefore subsequent activity was dependent on a single half site
and its context, whereas FimE recombination was less stringent, being able to
interact initially with two half sites with equally high affinity. While
increasing FimB recombination frequencies failed to overcome PapB repression,
mutations made in recombinase binding sites resulted in inhibition of FimE
recombination by PapB. Overall, the data support a model in which the
recombinases differ in loading order and co-operative interactions. PapB exploits
this difference and FimE becomes susceptible when its normal loading is
restricted or changed.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/010363-0 
PMID: 18048927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4334-42.

The N-acetyltransferase RimJ responds to environmental stimuli to repress pap
fimbrial transcription in Escherichia coli.

White-Ziegler CA(1), Black AM, Eliades SH, Young S, Porter K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA. cwhitezi@science.smith.edu.

In uropathogenic Escherichia coli, P pili (Pap) facilitate binding to host
epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. Whereas P pili can be produced at
37 degrees C, the expression of these fimbriae is suppressed at 23 degrees C.
Previously, insertion mutations in rimJ, a gene encoding the N-terminal
acetyltransferase of ribosomal protein S5, were shown to disrupt this
thermoregulatory response, allowing papBA transcription at low temperature. In
this study, we created an in-frame deletion of rimJ. This deletion relieved the
repressive effects not only of low temperature but also of rich (Luria-Bertani
[LB]) medium and glucose on papBA transcription, indicating that RimJ modulates
papBA transcription in response to multiple environmental stimuli. papI
transcription was also shown to be regulated by RimJ. papBA transcription is also
controlled by a phase variation mechanism. We demonstrated that the regulators
necessary to establish a phase ON state--PapI, PapB, Dam, Lrp, and cyclic
AMP-CAP-are still required for papBA transcription in a rimJ mutant strain. rimJ 
mutations increase the rate at which bacteria transition into the phase ON state,
indicating that RimJ inhibits the phase OFF-->ON transition. A DeltarimJ hns651
mutant is viable on LB medium but not on minimal medium. This synthetic
lethality, along with transcriptional analyses, indicates that RimJ and H-NS work
through separate pathways to control papBA transcription. Mutations in rimJ do
not greatly influence the transcription of the fan, daa, or fim operon,
suggesting that RimJ may be a pap-specific regulator. Overexpression of rimJ
under conditions repressive for papBA transcription complements the DeltarimJ
mutation but has little effect on transcription under activating conditions,
indicating that the ability of RimJ to regulate transcription is environmentally 
controlled.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.16.4334-4342.2002 
PMCID: PMC135235
PMID: 12142402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Mar;39(6):1504-22.

The essential role of the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP in pap phase
variation: Lrp- and helical phase-dependent activation of papBA transcription by 
CAP from -215.

Weyand NJ(1), Braaten BA, van der Woude M, Tucker J, Low DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) is essential for the expression of Pap
pili by uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Both in vitro and in vivo analyses
indicate that binding of cAMP-CAP centred at 215.5 bp upstream of the papBA
promoter is essential for activation of transcription. CAP-dependent activation
of papBA requires binding of the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) at
binding sites that extend from -180 to -149 relative to the start site of papBA. 
Our data indicate that CAP and Lrp bind independently to their respective pap DNA
sites. Activation of papBA transcription was eliminated by mutations in the
activating region 1 (AR1) of CAP, but not in the AR2 region, similar to class I
CAP-dependent promoters. Also, like class I promoters, the C-terminal domain of
the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase appears to play a role in transcription
activation. Moreover, phase variation is strictly dependent upon the helical
phase of the CAP DNA binding site with respect to the papBA transcription start
site. Using an 'oriented heterodimer' approach with wild-type and AR1 mutant
CAPs, it was shown that the AR1 region of the CAP subunit proximal to papBA is
required for stimulation of papBA transcription, whereas AR1 of the
promoter-distal subunit is not. Previously, CAP was hypothesized to activate pap 
transcription indirectly by disrupting repression mediated by H-NS. The results
presented here show that AR1 of the promoter-proximal CAP subunit was required
for papBA transcription even in the absence of the histone-like protein H-NS.
These results show that the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP, bound 215.5 bp
upstream of the papBA transcription start site, plays an active role in
stimulating papBA transcription, possibly by interacting with the C-terminal
domain of the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02338.x 
PMID: 11260468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lrp) AND (atpA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2020 Jul 29;84(3). pii: e00030-17. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00030-17. Print 2020 Aug 19.

A Thermosensitive, Phase-Variable Epigenetic Switch: pap Revisited.

Zamora M(#)(1)(2), Ziegler CA(#)(3), Freddolino PL(3)(4), Wolfe AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Stritch School of Medicine, Health Sciences Division, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Health 
Sciences Division, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA
awolfe@luc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

It has been more than a decade since the last comprehensive review of the
phase-variable uropathogen-associated pyelonephritis-associated pilus (pap)
genetic switch. Since then, important data have come to light, including
additional factors that regulate pap expression, better characterization of H-NS 
regulation, the structure of the Lrp octamer in complex with pap regulatory DNA, 
the temperature-insensitive phenotype of a mutant lacking the acetyltransferase
RimJ, evidence that key components of the regulatory machinery are acetylated,
and new insights into the role of DNA binding by key regulators in shaping both
the physical structure and regulatory state of the papI and papBA promoters. This
review revisits pap, integrating these newer observations with older ones to
produce a new model for the concerted behavior of this virulence-regulatory
region.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00030-17 
PMCID: PMC7392537
PMID: 32727743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2002 Aug;184(16):4334-42.

The N-acetyltransferase RimJ responds to environmental stimuli to repress pap
fimbrial transcription in Escherichia coli.

White-Ziegler CA(1), Black AM, Eliades SH, Young S, Porter K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA. cwhitezi@science.smith.edu.

In uropathogenic Escherichia coli, P pili (Pap) facilitate binding to host
epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. Whereas P pili can be produced at
37 degrees C, the expression of these fimbriae is suppressed at 23 degrees C.
Previously, insertion mutations in rimJ, a gene encoding the N-terminal
acetyltransferase of ribosomal protein S5, were shown to disrupt this
thermoregulatory response, allowing papBA transcription at low temperature. In
this study, we created an in-frame deletion of rimJ. This deletion relieved the
repressive effects not only of low temperature but also of rich (Luria-Bertani
[LB]) medium and glucose on papBA transcription, indicating that RimJ modulates
papBA transcription in response to multiple environmental stimuli. papI
transcription was also shown to be regulated by RimJ. papBA transcription is also
controlled by a phase variation mechanism. We demonstrated that the regulators
necessary to establish a phase ON state--PapI, PapB, Dam, Lrp, and cyclic
AMP-CAP-are still required for papBA transcription in a rimJ mutant strain. rimJ 
mutations increase the rate at which bacteria transition into the phase ON state,
indicating that RimJ inhibits the phase OFF-->ON transition. A DeltarimJ hns651
mutant is viable on LB medium but not on minimal medium. This synthetic
lethality, along with transcriptional analyses, indicates that RimJ and H-NS work
through separate pathways to control papBA transcription. Mutations in rimJ do
not greatly influence the transcription of the fan, daa, or fim operon,
suggesting that RimJ may be a pap-specific regulator. Overexpression of rimJ
under conditions repressive for papBA transcription complements the DeltarimJ
mutation but has little effect on transcription under activating conditions,
indicating that the ability of RimJ to regulate transcription is environmentally 
controlled.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.16.4334-4342.2002 
PMCID: PMC135235
PMID: 12142402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Mar;39(6):1504-22.

The essential role of the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP in pap phase
variation: Lrp- and helical phase-dependent activation of papBA transcription by 
CAP from -215.

Weyand NJ(1), Braaten BA, van der Woude M, Tucker J, Low DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) is essential for the expression of Pap
pili by uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Both in vitro and in vivo analyses
indicate that binding of cAMP-CAP centred at 215.5 bp upstream of the papBA
promoter is essential for activation of transcription. CAP-dependent activation
of papBA requires binding of the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) at
binding sites that extend from -180 to -149 relative to the start site of papBA. 
Our data indicate that CAP and Lrp bind independently to their respective pap DNA
sites. Activation of papBA transcription was eliminated by mutations in the
activating region 1 (AR1) of CAP, but not in the AR2 region, similar to class I
CAP-dependent promoters. Also, like class I promoters, the C-terminal domain of
the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase appears to play a role in transcription
activation. Moreover, phase variation is strictly dependent upon the helical
phase of the CAP DNA binding site with respect to the papBA transcription start
site. Using an 'oriented heterodimer' approach with wild-type and AR1 mutant
CAPs, it was shown that the AR1 region of the CAP subunit proximal to papBA is
required for stimulation of papBA transcription, whereas AR1 of the
promoter-distal subunit is not. Previously, CAP was hypothesized to activate pap 
transcription indirectly by disrupting repression mediated by H-NS. The results
presented here show that AR1 of the promoter-proximal CAP subunit was required
for papBA transcription even in the absence of the histone-like protein H-NS.
These results show that the promoter-proximal subunit of CAP, bound 215.5 bp
upstream of the papBA transcription start site, plays an active role in
stimulating papBA transcription, possibly by interacting with the C-terminal
domain of the alpha-subunit of RNA polymerase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02338.x 
PMID: 11260468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((csgD) AND (yhbT)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2011 May;193(10):2587-97. doi: 10.1128/JB.01468-10. Epub 2011 Mar
18.

Role of the biofilm master regulator CsgD in cross-regulation between biofilm
formation and flagellar synthesis.

Ogasawara H(1), Yamamoto K, Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Bioscience, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8584, 
Japan.

CsgD, the master regulator of biofilm formation, activates the synthesis of curli
fimbriae and extracellular polysaccharides in Escherichia coli. To obtain
insights into its regulatory role, we have identified a total of 20 novel
regulation target genes on the E. coli genome by using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip analysis with a high-density DNA microarray.
By DNase I footprinting, the consensus CsgD-binding sequence predicted from a
total of 18 target sites was found to include AAAAGNG(N(2))AAAWW. After a
promoter-lacZ fusion assay, the CsgD targets were classified into two groups:
group I genes, such as fliE and yhbT, are repressed by CsgD, while group II
genes, including yccT and adrA, are activated by CsgD. The fliE and fliEFGH
operons for flagellum formation are directly repressed by CsgD, while CsgD
activates the adrA gene, which encodes an enzyme for synthesis of cyclic di-GMP, 
a bacterial second messenger, which in turn inhibits flagellum production and
rotation. Taking these findings together, we propose that the cell motility for
planktonic growth is repressed by CsgD, thereby promoting the switch to biofilm
formation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01468-10 
PMCID: PMC3133154
PMID: 21421764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoQ) AND (phoP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Mar 29;13:818548. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.818548.
eCollection 2022.

Molecular Epidemiology and Colistin-Resistant Mechanism of mcr-Positive and
mcr-Negative Escherichia coli Isolated From Animal in Sichuan Province, China.

Li F(1)(2), Cheng P(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Liu R(1)(2), Liu H(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Heilongjiang Key Laboratory for Animal Disease Control and Pharmaceutical
Development, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China.
(2)Department of Basic Veterinary Science, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China.

Colistin is the last line of defense for the treatment of multidrug-resistant
gram-negative bacterial infections. However, colistin resistance is gradually
increasing worldwide, with resistance commonly regulated by two-component system 
and mcr gene. Thus, this study aimed to investigate molecular epidemiology and
colistin-resistant mechanism of mcr-positive and mcr-negative Escherichia coli
isolates from animal in Sichuan Province, China. In this study, a total of 101
colistin-resistant E. coli strains were isolated from 300 fecal samples in six
farms in Sichuan Province. PCR was used to detect mcr gene (mcr-1 to mcr-9). The 
prevalence of mcr-1 in colistin-resistant E. coli was 53.47% (54/101), and the
prevalence of mcr-3 in colistin-resistant E. coli was 10.89% (11/101). The
colistin-resistant E. coli and mcr-1-positive E. coli showed extensive
antimicrobial resistance profiles. For follow-up experiments, we used 30
mcr-negative and 30 mcr-1-positive colistin-resistant E. coli isolates and E.
coli K-12 MG1655 model strain. Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) of 30 strains
carrying mcr-1 as detected by PCR identified revealed six strains (20%) of ST10
and three strains (10%) of each ST206, ST48, and ST155 and either two (for ST542 
and 2539) or just one for all other types. The conjugation experiment and plasmid
replicon type analysis suggest that mcr-1 was more likely to be horizontally
transferred and primarily localized on IncX4-type and IncI2-type plasmid. The ST 
diversity of the mcr-1 indicated a scattered and non-clonal spreading in
mcr-1-positive E. coli. Twenty-eight mcr-negative colistin-resistant E. coli
isolates carried diverse amino acid alterations in PmrA, PmrB, PhoP, PhoQ, and
MgrB, whereas no mutation was found in the remaining isolates. The finding showed
the high prevalence of colistin resistance in livestock farm environments in
Sichuan Province, China. Our study demonstrates that colistin resistance is
related to chromosomal point mutations including the two-component systems
PhoP/PhoQ, PmrA/PmrB, and their regulators MgrB. These point mutations may confer
colistin resistance in mcr-negative E. coli. These findings help in gaining
insight of chromosomal-encoded colistin resistance in E. coli.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Cheng, Li, Liu, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.818548 
PMCID: PMC9002323
PMID: 35422787 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


2. Front Microbiol. 2022 Mar 9;13:826962. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.826962.
eCollection 2022.

Identification of the Genes of the Plant Pathogen Pseudomonas syringae MB03
Required for the Nematicidal Activity Against Caenorhabditis elegans Through an
Integrated Approach.

Ali M(1)(2), Gu T(1), Yu X(1), Bashir A(1), Wang Z(1), Sun X(1), Ashraf NM(3), Li
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, COMSATS University Islamabad, Abbottabad,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Gujrat, Gujrat,
Pakistan.

Nematicidal potential of the common plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae has been 
recently identified against Caenorhabditis elegans. The current study was
designed to investigate the detailed genetic mechanism of the bacterial
pathogenicity by applying comparative genomics, transcriptomics, mutant library
screening, and protein expression. Results showed that P. syringae strain MB03
could kill C. elegans in the liquid assay by gut colonization. The genome of P.
syringae MB03 was sequenced and comparative analysis including multi locus
sequence typing, and genome-to-genome distance placed MB03 in phylogroup II of P.
syringae. Furthermore, comparative genomics of MB03 with nematicidal strains of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PAO1 and PA14) predicted 115 potential virulence factors 
in MB03. However, genes for previously reported nematicidal metabolites, such as 
phenazine, pyochelin, and pyrrolnitrin, were found absent in the MB03 genome.
Transcriptomics analysis showed that the growth phase of the pathogen
considerably affected the expression of virulence factors, as genes for the
flagellum, glutamate ABC transporter, phoP/phoQ, fleS/fleR, type VI secretion
system, and serralysin were highly up-regulated when stationary phase MB03 cells 
interacted with C. elegans. Additionally, screening of a transposon insertion
mutant library led to the identification of other nematicidal genes such as acnA,
gltP, oprD, and zapE. Finally, the nematicidal activity of selected proteins was 
confirmed by heterologous expression in Escherichia coli.

Copyright © 2022 Ali, Gu, Yu, Bashir, Wang, Sun, Ashraf and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.826962 
PMCID: PMC8959697
PMID: 35356513 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


3. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2022 Feb 3. doi: 10.1556/030.2022.01679. [Epub ahead
of print]

Mutation in mgrB is the major colistin resistance mechanism in Klebsiella
pneumoniae clinical isolates in Tehran, Iran.

Khoshbayan A(1), Shariati A(2), Razavi S(1), Baseri Z(3), Ghodousi A(4),
Darban-Sarokhalil D(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)2 Molecular and Medicine Research Center, Khomein University of Medical
Sciences, Khomein, Iran.
(3)3 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Shariati Hospital, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)4 Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, Division of Immunology, Transplantation
and Infectious Diseases, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.

Colistin is considered as one of a last resort antimicrobial agent against
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria including Escherichia coli and
Klebsiella pneumoniae. However, the recent emergence of colistin resistance
(ColR) worldwide that severely restricts therapeutic options is a serious threat 
to global public health. In this study we have investigated the molecular
determinants in ColR K. pneumoniae isolates collected from clinical specimens. A 
total of 98 E. coli and 195 K. pneumoniae clinical isolates were collected from
two hospitals from August 2018 to December 2019 in Tehran, Iran. Colistin
susceptibility and minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were determined
according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute by disk diffusion
method, and microdilution method, respectively. For isolates with colistin MIC ≥4
μg mL-1, PCR was performed for the detection of mcr-1 to mcr-4 genes. Moreover,
nucleotide sequences of mgrB, phoP, phoQ, pmrA, and pmrB genes were determined by
sequencing. Finally, the transcriptional level of pmrK and pmrC genes was
evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR). None of the E.
coli isolates were resistant to colistin while 21 out 195 K. pneumoniae isolates 
were identified as resistant, 19 of which carried mutation in the mgrB gene.
Three different mutations were observed in the pmrB gene in 3 K. pneumoniae
isolates. None of the ColR isolates showed alternations in pmrA, phoP, and phoQ
genes. Furthermore, none of the plasmid-encoding genes were detected.
Transcriptional level of the pmrK gene increased in all ColR isolates meanwhile, 
pmrC overexpression was detected in 16 out 21 (76.19%) isolates. Eventually, all 
ColR isolates were susceptible to tigecycline. Our results demonstrated that the 
alternation of mgrB gene is the main mechanism related to colistin resistance
among ColR K. pneumoniae isolates in this study.

DOI: 10.1556/030.2022.01679 
PMID: 35113039 


4. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Dec 2;10(12). pii: 1478. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics10121478.

Clonal Dissemination of Plasmid-Mediated Carbapenem and Colistin Resistance in
Refugees Living in Overcrowded Camps in North Lebanon.

Azour A(1)(2)(3), Al-Bayssari C(1)(4), Dagher TN(2)(3), Fajloun F(1), Fajloun
M(1), Rolain JM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Sciences 3, Lebanese University, Michel Slayman Tripoli Campus, Ras
Maska 1352, Lebanon.
(2)IRD, APHM, MEPHI, IHU-Méditerranée Infection, Aix Marseille Univ., 13005
Marseille, France.
(3)Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, CEDEX 05,
13385 Marseille, France.
(4)Genomic Surveillance and Biotherapy Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences, Lebanese 
University, Ras Maska 1352, Lebanon.

Carbapenem and colistin-resistant bacteria represent a global public health
problem. Refugees carrying these bacteria and living in inadequate shelters can
spread these microorganisms. The aim of this study was to investigate the
intestinal carriage of these bacteria in Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Between June
and July 2019, 250 rectal swabs were collected from two refugee camps in North
Lebanon. Swabs were cultured on different selective media. Antibiotic
susceptibility testing was performed using the disk diffusion method.
Carbapenemase-encoding genes and mcr genes were investigated using real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Epidemiological relatedness was studied using multilocus sequence typing (MLST). 
From 250 rectal swabs, 16 carbapenem-resistant, 5 colistin-resistant, and 4
colistin and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae were isolated. The isolates 
exhibited multidrug-resistant phenotypes. Seven Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates
harboured the blaOXA-48 gene, and in addition four K. pneumoniae had mutations in
the two component systems pmrA/pmrB, phoP/phoQ and co-harboured the blaNDM-1
gene. Moreover, the blaNDM-1 gene was detected in six Escherichia coli and three 
Enterobacter cloacae isolates. The remaining five E. coli isolates harboured the 
mcr-1 gene. MLST results showed several sequence types, with a remarkable clonal 
dissemination. An urgent strategy needs to be adopted in order to avoid the
spread of such resistance in highly crowded underserved communities.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10121478 
PMCID: PMC8698793
PMID: 34943690 


5. J Basic Microbiol. 2021 Nov;61(11):1029-1034. doi: 10.1002/jobm.202100355. Epub
2021 Sep 12.

Subinhibitory concentration stress of colistin enhanced PhoPQ expression in
Escherichia coli harboring mcr-1.

Elizabeth R(1), Wangkheimayum J(1), Singha KM(2), Chanda DD(2), Bhattacharjee
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Assam University, Silchar, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar,
Assam, India.

The increased and inappropriate use of colistin led to the emergence of its
resistance among Gram-negative bacterial isolates and the most common mechanism
of colistin resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is the modification of the
lipopolysaccharide mediated by two-component regulatory systems, PhoPQ and PmrAB.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the transcriptional expression of
the PhoPQ system against colistin stress in clinical isolates of Escherichia coli
with colistin-resistant phenotype. Six colistin-resistant E. coli isolates were
obtained from Silchar Medical College and Hospital, Silchar that were of clinical
origin and received for routine culture and sensitivity testing. Screening for
colistin resistance was done by broth microdilution method and further screened
for the presence of the different types of plasmid-mediated colistin resistance
mcr genes namely, mcr-1 to mcr-10 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
screened positive isolates were subjected to PCR assay targeting phoP and phoQ
genes and their expression was measured by quantitative real-time PCR. The
results of this study revealed that two E. coli isolates (TS2 and TS4) were found
to carry the mcr-1 gene. PhoP and PhoQ gene amplification was observed in all the
isolates. Transcriptional analysis showed that the isolates harboring the mcr-1
gene showed an enhanced level of expression in the PhoP, PhoQ genes in the
presence of a subinhibitory concentration of colistin whereas no significant
expression was observed for the isolates which were devoid of the mcr gene. This 
study demonstrates the involvement of mcr-1 in the PhoPQ system in clinical
isolates of colistin-resistant E. coli which will help in designing a molecular
marker for detecting colistin-resistant E. coli and contribute to the assessment 
of resistance burden and infection control strategy.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.202100355 
PMID: 34510495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Aug 10;14:3041-3051. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S324303.
eCollection 2021.

Acquisition of the mcr-1 Gene Lowers the Target Mutation to Impede the Evolution 
of a High-Level Colistin-Resistant Mutant in Escherichia coli.

Huang C(1)(2), Shi Q(2), Zhang S(2), Wu H(1), Xiao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ningbo Medical Center Lihuili Hospital,
Ningbo, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The spread of the plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1
poses a significant public health threat. Little information is available on the 
development of high-level colistin-resistant mutants (HLCRMs) in MCR-1-producing 
Escherichia coli (MCRPEC). The present study was designed to evaluate the impact 
of chromosomal modifications in pmrAB, phoPQ, and mgrB combined with mcr-1 on
colistin resistance in E. coli.
METHODS: Five MCRPEC and three non-MCRPEC (E. coli ATCC25922 and two
plasmid-curing) strains were used. The HLCRMs were selected through
multi-stepwise colistin exposure. Moreover, two E. coli C600-pMCRs were
constructed and used for selection of HLCRMs. Further analysis included mutation 
rates and DNA sequencing. Transcripts of pmrABC, phoP, mgrB, and mcr-1 were
quantified by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: All tested HLCRMs were successfully isolated from their parental
strains. Non-MCRPEC strains had higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs)
and mutation rates than MCRPEC strains. Nineteen amino acid substitutions were
identified: seven in PmrA, six in PmrB, one in PhoP, three in PhoQ, and two in
MgrB. Most were detected in non-MCRPEC strains. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant 
predicted that four substitutions, PmrA Gly15Arg, Gly53Arg, PmrB Pro94Gln, and
PhoP Asp86Gly, affected protein function. Two HLCRM isolates did not show amino
acid substitutions in contrast to their parental MCRPEC isolates. No further
mutations were detected in the second- and third-step mutants. Further
transcriptional analysis showed that the up-regulation of pmrCAB expression was
greater in the mutant of E. coli C600 than in E. coli C600-pMCR.
CONCLUSION: Acquisition of the mcr-1 gene had a negative impact on the
development of HLCRMs in E. coli, but was associated with low-level colistin
resistance. Thus, colistin-based combination regimens may be effective against
infections with MCR-1-producing isolates.

© 2021 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S324303 
PMCID: PMC8364431
PMID: 34408448 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


7. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jul 28;12:682205. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205.
eCollection 2021.

MgrB Inactivation Confers Trimethoprim Resistance in Escherichia coli.

Shi H(1)(2), Li T(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Yang S(1)(2), Zhang XE(3), Tao
S(4), Gu J(1), Deng JY(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of TB Systems Biology and Translational
Medicine, Foshan, China.

After several decades of use, trimethoprim (TMP) remains one of the key access
antimicrobial drugs listed by the World Health Organization. To circumvent the
problem of trimethoprim resistance worldwide, a better understanding of
drug-resistance mechanisms is required. In this study, we screened the
single-gene knockout library of Escherichia coli, and identified mgrB and other
several genes involved in trimethoprim resistance. Subsequent comparative
transcriptional analysis between ΔmgrB and the wild-type strain showed that
expression levels of phoP, phoQ, and folA were significantly upregulated in
ΔmgrB. Further deleting phoP or phoQ could partially restore trimethoprim
sensitivity to ΔmgrB, and co-overexpression of phoP/Q caused TMP resistance,
suggesting the involvement of PhoP/Q in trimethoprim resistance. Correspondingly,
MgrB and PhoP were shown to be able to modulated folA expression in vivo. After
that, efforts were made to test if PhoP could directly modulate the expression of
folA. Though phosphorylated PhoP could bind to the promotor region of folA in
vitro, the former only provided a weak protection on the latter as shown by the
DNA footprinting assay. In addition, deleting the deduced PhoP box in ΔmgrB could
only slightly reverse the TMP resistance phenotype, suggesting that it is less
likely for PhoP to directly modulate the transcription of folA. Taken together,
our data suggested that, in E. coli, MgrB affects susceptibility to trimethoprim 
by modulating the expression of folA with the involvement of PhoP/Q. This work
broadens our understanding of the regulation of folate metabolism and the
mechanisms of TMP resistance in bacteria.

Copyright © 2021 Shi, Li, Xu, Yu, Yang, Zhang, Tao, Gu and Deng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682205 
PMCID: PMC8355897
PMID: 34394028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


8. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Nov;193(11):3672-3703. doi:
10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5. Epub 2021 Aug 5.

Increased Synthesis of a Magnesium Transporter MgtA During Recombinant
Autotransporter Expression in Escherichia coli.

Petrovskaya LE(1), Ziganshin RH(2), Kryukova EA(2)(3), Zlobinov AV(2), Gapizov
SS(2)(3)(4), Shingarova LN(2), Mironov VA(5), Lomakina GY(6)(7), Dolgikh
DA(2)(3)(4), Kirpichnikov MP(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
lpetr65@yahoo.com.
(2)Shemyakin & Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic , Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya, 16/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
(3)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Kosygina str., 4, Moscow, 119334,
Russia.
(4)Department of Biology, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
gory, 1, Moscow, 119234, Russia.
(5)Roche Diagnostics Rus LLC, Letnikovskaya str. 2/2, Moscow, 115114, Russia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1/3, Moscow, 119991, Russia.
(7)Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Baumanskaya 2-ya, 5/1, Moscow,
105005, Russia.

Overproduction of the membrane proteins in Escherichia coli cells is a common
approach to obtain sufficient material for their functional and structural
studies. However, the efficiency of this process can be limited by toxic effects 
which decrease the viability of the host and lead to low yield of the product.
During the expression of the esterase autotransporter AT877 from Psychrobacter
cryohalolentis K5T, we observed significant growth inhibition of the C41(DE3)
cells in comparison with the same cells producing other recombinant proteins.
Induction of AT877 synthesis also resulted in the elevated expression of a
magnesium transporter MgtA and decreased ATP content of the cells. To
characterize the response to overexpression of the autotransporter in bacterial
cells, we performed a comparative analysis of their proteomic profile by mass
spectrometry. According to the obtained data, E. coli cells which synthesize
AT877 experience complex stress condition presumably associated with secretion
apparatus overloading and improper localization of the recombinant protein.
Several response pathways were shown to be activated by AT877 overproduction
including Cpx, PhoP/PhoQ, Psp, and σE The obtained results open new opportunities
for optimization of the recombinant membrane protein expression in E. coli for
structural studies and biotechnological applications.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03634-5 
PMID: 34351586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Environ Pollut. 2021 Nov 1;288:117804. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804. Epub
2021 Jul 17.

Multiple sequence types, virulence determinants and antimicrobial resistance
genes in multidrug- and colistin-resistant Escherichia coli from agricultural and
non-agricultural soils.

Furlan JPR(1), Stehling EG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Toxicológicas e Bromatológicas, Faculdade
de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: elianags@usp.br.

In soils, the presence of clinically relevant bacteria carrying ARGs, including
extended-spectrum β-lactamase- and plasmid-mediated AmpC β-lactamase-encoding
genes, is an underestimated public health problem that requires more attention.
For this investigation, 300 samples from agricultural and non-agricultural soils 
were used to obtain 41 MDR E. coli isolates, standing out the resistance to
β-lactams, fluoroquinolones and colistin. Virulence genes related to
diarrheagenic E. coli and extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli were detected.
Several ARGs were found, highlighting the presence of at least one
β-lactamase-encoding gene (blaTEM, blaCMY, blaSHV, blaOXA-1-like, blaCTX-M-2,
and/or blaCTX-M-15) in each isolate. Among the fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli 
isolates, the plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance genes (qnrB and oqxA) and
substitutions in the quinolone resistance-determining regions were detected. Some
isolates were resistant to colistin (MICs of 4-8 mg/L) and, although no mcr-like 
gene was detected, substitutions in the two-component systems involving PhoP/PhoQ
and PmrA/PmrB were found. Furthermore, the E. coli isolates presented plasmids
and class 1 integrons, the last one detected in all isolates. The ARGs blaTEM,
aadA and dfrA and the lpfA virulence-associated gene presented statistically
significant differences (P < 0.05) in agricultural soils, while the blaOXA-1-like
gene presented a statistically significant difference in non-agricultural soils. 
Thirty-eight sequence types (STs) were identified among the isolates,
spotlighting the 20 different STs that carried blaCMY and blaCTX-M-type genes and
those commonly reported in infections worldwide. The occurrence of virulent,
multidrug- and colistin-resistant E. coli isolates in soils could lead to
contamination of surrounding environments and food, increasing the risk of human 
and animal exposure. Therefore, this study contributes to a better understanding 
of E. coli in soils and reinforces the importance of the One Health approach to
antimicrobial resistance surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117804 
PMID: 34329068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Jul 12;14:2657-2666. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S314490.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Mechanism of Polymyxin Resistance in Multidrug-Resistant Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Escherichia coli Isolates from Henan Province, China: A
Multicenter Study.

Yan W(#)(1), Zhang Q(#)(1), Zhu Y(1), Jing N(1), Yuan Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Ren S(3),
Hu D(4), Zhao W(5), Zhang X(6), Shi C(7), Wang M(8), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Henan Provincial People's Hospital,
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, People's Hospital of Henan University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhengzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng People's Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhumadian First People's Hospital,
Zhumadian, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kaifeng Central Hospital, Kaifeng, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Gongyi People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan,
People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Microbiology Laboratory, KingMed Diagnostics, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Medical Imaging, Henan Provincial People's Hospital & the
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of
China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To evaluate polymyxin-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia
coli prevalence and characteristics in the Henan province, China.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 2301 bacterial isolates collected at six
hospitals were assessed. Their response to polymyxin was evaluated by minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) analysis, and the mobilized colistin resistance
(mcr) and carbapenemase gene were explored. Mutations on mgrB, phoPQ, pmrAB, and 
crrAB in polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae were detected by PCR. phoP, phoQ,
pmrK, pmrA, pmrB, and pmrC transcriptional levels were quantified by RT-qPCR.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multi-locus sequence typing were
performed to determine the phylogenetic relationship between the
polymyxin-resistant isolates.
RESULTS: Of the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates identified, 0.3% and 1.4% were
polymyxin-resistant, respectively, with MICs of 4-64 μg/mL. All
polymyxin-resistant isolates were susceptible to tigecycline. Four E. coli
isolates were mcr-1-positive and one was carbapenem-resistant, carrying bla NDM-5
and mcr-1. One K. pneumoniae isolate was mcr-1-positive and nine were
carbapenem-resistant (PRCRKP), carrying bla KPC-2 but not mcr-1. The five E. coli
isolates belonged to four sequence types (ST2, ST132, ST632, and ST983). All
PRCRKP isolates belonged to ST11. However, all 16 isolates belonged to different 
PFGE types with <95% genetic similarity. Insertion sequences in mgrB were
detected in nine (81.8%) polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae samples. Colistin
resistance was linked with pmrHFIJKLM operon upregulation, with phoP, phoQ, and
pmrK being overexpressed in all but one of the polymyxin-resistant K. pneumoniae 
samples. Furthermore, 33.3% of patients carrying polymyxin-resistant isolates had
previously used polymyxin, and 66.7% patients displayed good clinical outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The K. pneumoniae polymyxin resistance rate was slightly higher than 
that of E. coli and mcr-1 was more common in E. coli than in K. pneumoniae.
Moreover, the insertion of ISkpn14 into mgrB may be the main contributor to
polymyxin-resistance in K. pneumoniae in Henan.

© 2021 Yan et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S314490 
PMCID: PMC8285567
PMID: 34285518 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


############# ((phoP) AND (iraP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 5;103(36):13503-8. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

The PhoP/PhoQ two-component system stabilizes the alternative sigma factor RpoS
in Salmonella enterica.

Tu X(1), Latifi T, Bougdour A, Gottesman S, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The sigma factor RpoS regulates the expression of many stress response genes and 
is required for virulence in several bacterial species. We now report that RpoS
accumulates when Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is growing
logarithmically in media with low Mg(2+) concentrations. This process requires
the two-component regulatory system PhoP/PhoQ, which is specifically activated in
low Mg(2+). We show that PhoP controls RpoS protein turnover by serving as a
transcriptional activator of the iraP (yaiB) gene, which encodes a product that
enhances RpoS stability by interacting with RssB, the protein that normally
delivers RpoS to the ClpXP protease for degradation. Mutation of the phoP gene
rendered Salmonella as sensitive to hydrogen peroxide as an rpoS mutant after
growth in low Mg(2+). In Escherichia coli, low Mg(2+) leads to only modest RpoS
stabilization, and iraP is not regulated by PhoP/PhoQ. These findings add the
sigma factor RpoS to the regulatory proteins and two-component systems that are
elevated in a PhoP/PhoQ-dependent fashion when Salmonella face low Mg(2+)
environments. Our data also exemplify the critical differences in regulatory
circuits that exist between the closely related enteric bacteria Salmonella and
E. coli.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0606026103 
PMCID: PMC1557385
PMID: 16938894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (kdpE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003201. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

The KdpD/KdpE two-component system: integrating K⁺ homeostasis and virulence.

Freeman ZN(1), Dorus S, Waterfield NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

The two-component system (TCS) KdpD/KdpE, extensively studied for its regulatory 
role in potassium (K(+)) transport, has more recently been identified as an
adaptive regulator involved in the virulence and intracellular survival of
pathogenic bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, entero-haemorrhagic
Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Yersinia pestis, Francisella species,
Photorhabdus asymbiotica, and mycobacteria. Key homeostasis requirements
monitored by KdpD/KdpE and other TCSs such as PhoP/PhoQ are critical to survival 
in the stressful conditions encountered by pathogens during host interactions. It
follows these TCSs may therefore acquire adaptive roles in response to selective 
pressures associated with adopting a pathogenic lifestyle. Given the central role
of K(+) in virulence, we propose that KdpD/KdpE, as a regulator of a
high-affinity K(+) pump, has evolved virulence-related regulatory functions. In
support of this hypothesis, we review the role of KdpD/KdpE in bacterial
infection and summarize evidence that (i) KdpD/KdpE production is correlated with
enhanced virulence and survival, (ii) KdpE regulates a range of virulence loci
through direct promoter binding, and (iii) KdpD/KdpE regulation responds to
virulence-related conditions including phagocytosis, exposure to microbicides,
quorum sensing signals, and host hormones. Furthermore, antimicrobial stress,
osmotic stress, and oxidative stress are associated with KdpD/KdpE activity, and 
the system's accessory components (which allow TCS fine-tuning or crosstalk)
provide links to stress response pathways. KdpD/KdpE therefore appears to be an
important adaptive TCS employed during host infection, promoting bacterial
virulence and survival through mechanisms both related to and distinct from its
conserved role in K(+) regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201 
PMCID: PMC3610689
PMID: 23555240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (kdpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003201. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

The KdpD/KdpE two-component system: integrating K⁺ homeostasis and virulence.

Freeman ZN(1), Dorus S, Waterfield NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

The two-component system (TCS) KdpD/KdpE, extensively studied for its regulatory 
role in potassium (K(+)) transport, has more recently been identified as an
adaptive regulator involved in the virulence and intracellular survival of
pathogenic bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, entero-haemorrhagic
Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Yersinia pestis, Francisella species,
Photorhabdus asymbiotica, and mycobacteria. Key homeostasis requirements
monitored by KdpD/KdpE and other TCSs such as PhoP/PhoQ are critical to survival 
in the stressful conditions encountered by pathogens during host interactions. It
follows these TCSs may therefore acquire adaptive roles in response to selective 
pressures associated with adopting a pathogenic lifestyle. Given the central role
of K(+) in virulence, we propose that KdpD/KdpE, as a regulator of a
high-affinity K(+) pump, has evolved virulence-related regulatory functions. In
support of this hypothesis, we review the role of KdpD/KdpE in bacterial
infection and summarize evidence that (i) KdpD/KdpE production is correlated with
enhanced virulence and survival, (ii) KdpE regulates a range of virulence loci
through direct promoter binding, and (iii) KdpD/KdpE regulation responds to
virulence-related conditions including phagocytosis, exposure to microbicides,
quorum sensing signals, and host hormones. Furthermore, antimicrobial stress,
osmotic stress, and oxidative stress are associated with KdpD/KdpE activity, and 
the system's accessory components (which allow TCS fine-tuning or crosstalk)
provide links to stress response pathways. KdpD/KdpE therefore appears to be an
important adaptive TCS employed during host infection, promoting bacterial
virulence and survival through mechanisms both related to and distinct from its
conserved role in K(+) regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003201 
PMCID: PMC3610689
PMID: 23555240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (ybjX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Res Vet Sci. 2019 Aug;125:279-284. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.008. Epub 2019 Jul
12.

Outer membrane proteins YbjX and PagP co-regulate motility in Escherichia coli
via the bacterial chemotaxis pathway.

Song X(1), Hou M(1), Tu J(1), Xue M(1), Shao Y(1), Jiang H(1), Liu H(1), Xue
T(1), Wang G(1), Qi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, PR China.
(2)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, PR China. Electronic address: qkz@ahau.edu.cn.

Mutation of the PhoP/Q two-component system decreases the expression of ybjX and 
pagP encoding outer membrane proteins, and mutation of ybjX or pagP attenuates
avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) pathogenicity. However, whether
ybjX/pagP mutation (double-deletion mutant) has a synergistic effect on
pathogenicity remains unknown. Herein, electrophoresis mobility shift assay
(EMSA) experiments showed that the PhoP/Q system regulated ybjX and pagP
transcription indirectly. The APECΔybjX/pagP mutant strain, constructed using the
Red recombination method, exhibited reduced invasion of chicken embryo fibroblast
(DF-1) cells, but had no effect on virulence in a chicken model. Using RNA
sequencing to identify differential mRNAs in APECΔybjXΔpagP and native strains,
we revealed up-regulation of genes involved in the bacterial chemotaxis pathway. 
The ybjX/pagP mutant strain displayed significantly increased motility,
suggesting that double deletion of ybjX and pagP enhances motility via the
bacterial chemotaxis pathway.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.008 
PMID: 31326704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Avian Pathol. 2018 Jun;47(3):294-299. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1448053. Epub
2018 Mar 27.

The role of the outer membrane protein gene ybjX in the pathogenicity of avian
pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Song X(1), Li C(1), Qi K(1), Tu J(1), Liu H(1), Xue T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease
Control, College of Animal Science and Technology , Anhui Agricultural University
, Hefei , People's Republic of China.

Avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) are important pathogens that cause
serious economic losses to the poultry industry worldwide. The PhoP/Q system is
essential for APEC pathogenicity, and its mutation leads to a decrease in ybjX
gene expression, but whether ybjX regulated by PhoP/Q plays a role in
pathogenicity remains unclear. The role of ybjX in APEC pathogenicity was
investigated using a ybjX mutant strain constructed from APEC strain AE17 by the 
Red recombination method. The mutant strain displayed significantly reduced
adherence to and invasion of chicken embryo fibroblast cell line (DF-1) cells.
Moreover, N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine (NPN) assays revealed an increase in outer
membrane permeabilization for the ybjX mutant, suggesting ybjX affected
susceptibility to avian beta-defensin through this mechanism. The ybjX mutation
increased susceptibility to avian beta-defensin 9 (AvBD9), and in vivo LD50
assays revealed reduced bacterial virulence in a chicken model. Taken together,
these results indicated that mutation of ybjX may attenuate APEC pathogenicity,
not only by affecting bacterial adhesion and invasion, but also via reducing
resistance to avian beta-defensin by increasing outer membrane permeabilization
of bacteria.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1448053 
PMID: 29517278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (astA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Nov 21;8:2278. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02278. eCollection
2017.

Characterization of Colistin-Resistant Escherichia coli Isolated from Diseased
Pigs in France.

Delannoy S(1), Le Devendec L(2)(3), Jouy E(2)(3), Fach P(1), Drider D(4), Kempf
I(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Alimentation, de l'Environnement
et du Travail, Food Safety Laboratory, Université Paris-Est, Maisons-Alfort,
France.
(2)Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Alimentation, de l'Environnement
et du Travail, Ploufragan Laboratory, Ploufragan, France.
(3)Université Bretagne Loire, Rennes, France.
(4)Institut Charles Viollette, Université de Lille, Lille, France.

We studied a collection of 79 colistin-resistant Escherichia coli isolates
isolated from diseased pigs in France between 2009 and 2013. We determined a
number of phenotypic and genetic characters using broth microdilution to
characterize their antimicrobial susceptibility. We performed pulse field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) to assess their genetic diversity and assign them to
phylogroups. High-throughput real-time PCR micro-array was used to screen for a
selection of genetic markers of virulence, and PCR and sequencing of the main
recognized resistance genes allowed us to investigate the mechanisms of colistin 
resistance. Results showed that isolates belonged to several phylogroups and most
had a unique PFGE profile. More than 50% of the isolates were also resistant to
sulfonamides, trimethoprim, tetracycline, ampicillin or chloramphenicol. The
mcr-1 gene was detected in 70 out of 79 isolates and was transferred by
conjugation in 33 of them, sometimes together with resistance to sulfonamides,
trimethoprim, tetracycline, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, cefotaxime, or
gentamicin. Mutations in the amino-acid sequences of proteins MgrB, PhoP, PhoQ,
PmrB, but not PmrA, were detected in isolates with or without the mcr-1 gene.
More than one-third of the isolates harbored the F18, F4, astA, hlyA, estI,
estII, elt, stx2e, iha, orfA, orfB, paa, terE, ecs1763, or ureD virulence
markers. In conclusion, although most isolates had a unique PFGE profile, a few
particular combinations of phylogenetic groups, virulence genes and mutations in 
the sequenced genes involved in colistin resistance were identified on a number
of occasions, suggesting the persistence of certain isolates over several years.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02278 
PMCID: PMC5702452
PMID: 29209292 


############# ((phoP) AND (fadD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2001 May;183(9):2733-45.

Roles of hilC and hilD in regulation of hilA expression in Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium.

Lucas RL(1), Lee CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Sequences between -332 and -39 upstream of the hilA promoter are required for
repression of hilA. An unidentified repressor is thought to bind these upstream
repressing sequences (URS) to inhibit hilA expression. Two AraC-like
transcriptional regulators encoded on Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI1),
HilC and HilD, bind to the URS to counteract the repression of hilA. The URS is
required for regulation of hilA by osmolarity, oxygen, PhoP/PhoQ, and SirA/BarA. 
Here, we show that FadD, FliZ, PhoB, and EnvZ/OmpR also require the URS to
regulate hilA. These environmental and regulatory factors may affect hilA
expression by altering the expression or activity of HilC, HilD, or the unknown
repressor. To begin investigating these possibilities, we tested the effects of
environmental and regulatory factors on hilC and hilD expression. We also
examined hilA regulation when hilC or hilD was disrupted or expressed to a high
level. Although hilC is regulated by all environmental conditions and regulatory 
factors that modulate hilA expression, hilC is not required for the regulation of
hilA by any conditions or factors except EnvZ/OmpR. In contrast, hilD is
absolutely required for hilA expression, but environmental conditions and
regulatory factors have little or no effect on hilD expression. We speculate that
EnvZ/OmpR regulates hilA by altering the expression and/or activity of hilC,
while all other regulatory conditions and mutations regulate hilA by modulating
hilD posttranscriptionally. We also discuss models in which the regulation of
hilA expression is mediated by modulation of the expression or activity of one or
more repressors.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.9.2733-2745.2001 
PMCID: PMC99488
PMID: 11292791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (ugd)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):50588-95. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

Signal-dependent requirement for the co-activator protein RcsA in transcription
of the RcsB-regulated ugd gene.

Mouslim C(1), Latifi T, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The RcsC/YojN/RcsB phosphorelay system controls gene expression in response to a 
variety of signals, including changes in temperature, osmolarity, and
overproduction of membrane proteins. Transcription of certain RcsB-activated
genes, such as the capsule synthesis cps operon, requires the co-activator
protein RcsA, whereas expression of other RcsB-activated genes is
RcsA-independent. We have established previously that a tolB mutation induces
transcription of the Salmonella UDP-glucose dehydrogenase ugd gene in an RcsA-
and RcsB-dependent manner. This induction is independent of the two-component
systems PhoP/PhoQ and PmrA/PmrB, which are required for ugd expression in
response to low Mg2+. We now report that the RcsC/YojN/RcsB system is activated
in a pmrA mutant experiencing Fe3+ and low Mg2+, resulting in expression of both 
cps and ugd genes. However, whereas cps transcription remained RcsA-dependent,
ugd transcription became RcsA-independent but dependent on the PhoP protein. S1
mapping experiments demonstrated that RcsA-dependent and -independent
transcription of the ugd gene use the same promoter. DNase footprinting analysis 
identified a PhoP-binding site in the ugd promoter. Yet, PhoP-mediated ugd
transcription required either the RcsC/YojN/RcsB or the PmrA/PmrB systems.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309433200 
PMID: 14514676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (pmrD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Feb 17;65(3). pii: e00889-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00889-20. Print 2021 Feb 17.

Effects of Regulatory Network Organization and Environment on PmrD Connector
Activity and Polymyxin Resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli.

Chen AI(1), Albicoro FJ(2), Zhu J(3), Goulian M(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA goulian@sas.upenn.edu.
(5)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Polymyxins are a class of cyclic peptides with antimicrobial activity against
Gram-negative bacteria. In Enterobacteriaceae, the PhoQ/PhoP and PmrB/PmrA
two-component systems regulate many genes that confer resistance to both
polymyxins and host antimicrobial peptides. The activities of these two-component
systems are modulated by additional proteins that are conserved across
Enterobacteriaceae, such as MgrB, a negative regulator of PhoQ, and PmrD, a
"connector" protein that activates PmrB/PmrA in response to PhoQ/PhoP
stimulation. Despite the conservation of many protein components of the
PhoQ/PhoP-PmrD-PmrB/PmrA network, the specific molecular interactions and
regulatory mechanisms vary across different genera. Here, we explore the role of 
PmrD in modulating this signaling network in Klebsiella pneumoniae and
Escherichia coli We show that in K. pneumoniae, PmrD is not required for
polymyxin resistance arising from mutation of mgrB-the most common cause of
spontaneous polymyxin resistance in this bacterium-suggesting that direct
activation of polymyxin resistance genes by PhoQ/PhoP plays a critical role in
this resistance pathway. However, for conditions of low pH or intermediate iron
concentrations, both of which stimulate PmrB/PmrA, we find that PmrD does
contribute to resistance. We further show that in E. coli, PmrD functions as a
connector between PhoQ/PhoP and PmrB/PmrA, in contrast with previous reports. In 
this case, activity also depends on PmrB/PmrA stimulation, or on very high
activation of PhoQ/PhoP. Our results indicate that the importance of the PmrD
connector in modulating the polymyxin resistance network depends on both the
network organization and on the environmental conditions associated with PmrB
stimulation.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00889-20 
PMCID: PMC8092550
PMID: 33361295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Dec;166(12):1149-1159. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000988.

Molecular basis of bile-salt- and iron-induced enterohaemorrhagic E. coli
resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides.

Kunwar CB(1), Birstonas S(1), McPhee JB(1), Barnett Foster D(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biology, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Colonization of the gastrointestinal tract by enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli
(EHEC) is critically dependent on its ability to sense and respond to various
microenvironments within the host. EHEC exposure to physiologically relevant
levels of bile salts upregulates the two-component system, pmrAB, and the
arnBCADTEF operon, resulting in lipopolysaccharide modification and increased
resistance to the cationic antimicrobial peptide, polymyxin B (PMB). A similar
pmrAB- and arn-dependent PMB resistance has been observed in Salmonella enterica 
in the presence of ferric iron. Limiting magnesium levels and mild acid can also 
induce Salmonella resistance to PMB through another two-component system, PhoPQ
and the connector protein, PmrD. This study aims to evaluate the relative
contributions of a bile-salt mix (BSM), iron, limiting magnesium as well as the
roles of pmrAB, phoPQ and pmrD to EHEC's resistance to PMB. Killing assays show
that EHEC treatment with the BSM or iron under excess magnesium and neutral pH
conditions induces a pmrAB-dependent, phoP-independent PMB resistance. By
contrast, exposure to limiting magnesium triggers a pmrB-, phoP- and
pmrD-dependent PMB resistance. The iron-induced PMB resistance is independent of 
phoP and pmrD under limiting magnesium conditions while the bile-salt-induced PMB
resistance is independent of pmrD only under non-PhoP-inducing conditions.
GFP-pmrD transcriptional reporter studies reveal that the limiting magnesium
enhances pmrD expression, which is repressed upon additional exposure to either
BSM or iron. Our results also show that exposure to mild acid enhances PMB
resistance in a pmrD-independent manner and GFP reporter results confirm minimal 
expression of pmrD at this pH regardless of the magnesium level. This study
provides novel insights into how EHEC differentially employs PmrAB, PhoPQ and
PmrD to monitor and respond to bile salts, iron, acidic pH and magnesium
typically encountered within the gastrointestinal tract in order to modulate its 
survival against cationic antimicrobial peptides.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000988 
PMID: 33205745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Oct 23;12:3291-3299. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S225383.
eCollection 2019.

Characterization Of Chromosome-Mediated Colistin Resistance In Escherichia coli
Isolates From Livestock In Korea.

Kim S(1), Woo JH(1), Kim N(1), Kim MH(1), Kim SY(1), Son JH(1), Moon DC(2), Lim
SK(2), Shin M(1), Lee JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(2)Bacterial Disease Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Gimcheon-si,
Gyeongsangbuk-do, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Colistin resistance in gram-negative bacteria from humans and livestock 
has been increasingly reported worldwide. The aim of this study was to
investigate the underlying mechanisms of chromosome-mediated colistin resistance 
in Escherichia coli isolates from livestock in Korea.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty mcr-1-negative isolates were selected from a
collection of colistin-resistant E. coli isolates collected from livestock in
2005 and 2015 in Korea. Amino acid alterations in PmrAB, PhoPQ, MgrB, and PmrD
were investigated. Colistin-resistant derivatives were produced by serial passage
of colistin-susceptible E. coli isolates in colistin-containing media.
RESULTS: Thirty colistin-resistant mcr-negative E. coli isolates were classified 
into 26 sequence types. Twenty-two isolates carried diverse amino acid
alterations in PmrB, PhoP, PhoQ, MgrB, and/or PmrD, whereas no mutation in any of
these genes was found in the remaining eight isolates. Sixteen out of the 22
isolates shared a total of nine polymorphic positions that were found in
colistin-susceptible E. coli strains. Colistin-resistant derivatives from two
colistin-susceptible isolates showed the same genetic alterations that were
observed in colistin-resistant clinical isolates.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the mechanism underlying chromosome-mediated
colistin resistance remain to be discovered in E. coli. Selective pressure of
colistin in vitro induced the same genetic mutations associated with colistin
resistance in vivo. Efforts to reduce colistin consumption in livestock should be
redoubled, to prevent the occurrence of colistin-resistant E. coli strains.

© 2019 Kim et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S225383 
PMCID: PMC6815941
PMID: 31695448 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


4. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Apr;59(4):2051-61. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05052-14.
Epub 2015 Jan 20.

PmrD is required for modifications to escherichia coli endotoxin that promote
antimicrobial resistance.

Rubin EJ(1), Herrera CM(2), Crofts AA(2), Trent MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA Center for Infectious Disease, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA strent@austin.utexas.edu.

In Salmonella enterica, PmrD is a connector protein that links the two-component 
systems PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB. While Escherichia coli encodes a PmrD homolog,
it is thought to be incapable of connecting PhoPQ and PmrAB in this organism due 
to functional divergence from the S. enterica protein. However, our laboratory
previously observed that low concentrations of Mg(2+), a PhoPQ-activating signal,
leads to the induction of PmrAB-dependent lipid A modifications in wild-type E.
coli (C. M. Herrera, J. V. Hankins, and M. S. Trent, Mol Microbiol 76:1444-1460, 
2010, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07150.x). These modifications
include phosphoethanolamine (pEtN) and 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose (l-Ara4N),
which promote bacterial resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs)
when affixed to lipid A. Here, we demonstrate that pmrD is required for
modification of the lipid A domain of E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) under
low-Mg(2+) growth conditions. Further, RNA sequencing shows that E. coli pmrD
influences the expression of pmrA and its downstream targets, including genes
coding for the modification enzymes that transfer pEtN and l-Ara4N to the lipid A
molecule. In line with these findings, a pmrD mutant is dramatically impaired in 
survival compared with the wild-type strain when exposed to the CAMP polymyxin B.
Notably, we also reveal the presence of an unknown factor or system capable of
activating pmrD to promote lipid A modification in the absence of the PhoPQ
system. These results illuminate a more complex network of protein interactions
surrounding activation of PhoPQ and PmrAB in E. coli than previously understood.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05052-14 
PMCID: PMC4356761
PMID: 25605366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Struct Biol. 2014 Dec 5;14:24. doi: 10.1186/s12900-014-0024-y.

Structural insights into Escherichia coli polymyxin B resistance protein D with
X-ray crystallography and small-angle X-ray scattering.

Jo H(1), Jeong EY(2), Jeon J(3), Ban C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
jhhsst@postech.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
eyjeong@postech.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
sung0214@postech.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 77,
Cheongam-Ro, Nam-Gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 790-784, South Korea.
ciban@postech.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Polymyxin B resistance protein D (PmrD) plays a key role in the
polymyxin B-resistance pathway, as it is the signaling protein that can act as a 
specific connecter between PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ. We conducted structural
analysis to characterize Escherichia coli (E. coli) PmrD, which exhibits
different features compared with PmrD in other bacteria.
RESULTS: The X-ray crystal structure of E. coli PmrD was determined at a 2.00 Å
resolution, revealing novel information such as the unambiguous secondary
structures of the protein and the presence of a disulfide bond. Furthermore,
various assays such as native gel electrophoresis, surface plasmon resonance
(SPR), size-exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and
small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements, were performed to elucidate the
structural and functional role of the internal disulfide bond in E. coli PmrD.
CONCLUSIONS: The structural characteristics of E. coli PmrD were clearly
identified via diverse techniques. The findings help explain the different
protective mechanism of E. coli compared to other Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12900-014-0024-y 
PMCID: PMC4263063
PMID: 25480013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002184. Epub 2011 
Jul 21.

Ancestral genes can control the ability of horizontally acquired loci to confer
new traits.

Chen HD(1), Jewett MW, Groisman EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Horizontally acquired genes typically function as autonomous units conferring new
abilities when introduced into different species. However, we reasoned that
proteins preexisting in an organism might constrain the functionality of a
horizontally acquired gene product if it operates on an ancestral pathway. Here, 
we determine how the horizontally acquired pmrD gene product activates the
ancestral PmrA/PmrB two-component system in Salmonella enterica but not in the
closely related bacterium Escherichia coli. The Salmonella PmrD protein binds to 
the phosphorylated PmrA protein (PmrA-P), protecting it from dephosphorylation by
the PmrB protein. This results in transcription of PmrA-dependent genes,
including those conferring polymyxin B resistance. We now report that the E. coli
PmrD protein can activate the PmrA/PmrB system in Salmonella even though it
cannot do it in E. coli, suggesting that these two species differ in an
additional component controlling PmrA-P levels. We establish that the E. coli
PmrB displays higher phosphatase activity towards PmrA-P than the Salmonella
PmrB, and we identified a PmrB subdomain responsible for this property.
Replacement of the E. coli pmrB gene with the Salmonella homolog was sufficient
to render E. coli resistant to polymyxin B under PmrD-inducing conditions. Our
findings provide a singular example whereby quantitative differences in the
biochemical activities of orthologous ancestral proteins dictate the ability of a
horizontally acquired gene product to confer species-specific traits. And they
suggest that horizontally acquired genes can potentiate selection at ancestral
loci.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002184 
PMCID: PMC3140997
PMID: 21811415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


7. Int J Biol Macromol. 2009 Jun 1;44(5):393-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.02.006.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Insights into the structure of the PmrD protein with molecular dynamics
simulations.

Tatsis VA(1), Tsoulos IG, Krinas CS, Alexopoulos C, Stavrakoudis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information and Telecommunications Engineering, University of
West Macedonia, Kozani, Greece.

Resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B from Gram-negative
bacteria is accomplished by two-component systems (TCSs), protein complexes
PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ. PmrD is the first protein identified to mediate the
connectivity between two TCSs. The 3D structure of PmrD has been recently solved 
by NMR and its unique fold was revealed. Here, a molecular dynamics study is
presented started from the NMR structure. Numerous hydrophobic and electrostatic 
interactions were identified to contribute to PmrD's 3D stability. Moreover, the 
mobility of the five loops that connect the protein's six beta-strands has been
explored. Solvent-accessible surface area calculation revealed that a
Leucine-rich hydrophobic cluster of the protein stabilized the protein's
structure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.02.006 
PMID: 19428472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 5;361(4):1033-7. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

First structure of the polymyxin resistance proteins.

Fu W(1), Yang F, Kang X, Zhang X, Li Y, Xia B, Jin C.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center, Peking University, No. 5,
Yi-He-Yuan, Beijing 100871, China.

PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ are a pair of two-component systems (TCSs) that allow the
Gram-negative bacteria to survive the cationic antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B.
The two TCSs are linked by the polymyxin resistance protein, PmrD. The
PhoP-activated PmrD protects the phosphorylated response regulator PmrA from
dephosphorylation, and promotes the transcription of PmrA-activated genes
responsible for polymyxin resistance. PmrD is the first protein identified to
mediate the connectivity between two TCSs by protecting the phosphorylated
response regulator of the downstream TCS. PmrD shows no homology to proteins with
known structures. We present here the solution structure of PmrD from Escherichia
coli, the first three-dimensional structure of the PmrD family. Our study
provides the structural basis of the novel interacting mechanism of bacterial
two-component signal-transduction systems.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.07.144 
PMID: 17686460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Trends Biochem Sci. 2005 Feb;30(2):70-2.

A novel mechanism for connecting bacterial two-component signal-transduction
systems.

Eguchi Y(1), Utsumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture of 
Kinki University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Bacteria have many two-component signal-transduction systems (TCSs) that respond 
to specific environmental signals by altering the phosphorylated state of a
response regulator. Although these systems are presumed to form an intricate
signal network, the detailed mechanism of how they interact with each other
remains largely unexplained. In a recent study of Salmonella, two TCSs have been 
discovered to be connected by a protein that protects a response regulator from
dephosphorylation promoted by its cognate sensor kinase. This novel mechanism
might provide an answer to some of the linkages found between other TCSs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2004.12.003 
PMID: 15691651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (ftsH)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 May 30;114(22):5689-5694. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1703415114. Epub 2017 May 16.

Increasing intracellular magnesium levels with the 31-amino acid MgtS protein.

Wang H(1)(2), Yin X(1)(3), Wu Orr M(1), Dambach M(1), Curtis R(1), Storz G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892-5430.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
(3)Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.
(4)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892-5430;
storzg@mail.nih.gov.

Synthesis of the 31-amino acid, inner membrane protein MgtS (formerly denoted
YneM) is induced by very low Mg2+ in a PhoPQ-dependent manner in Escherichia coli
Here we report that MgtS acts to increase intracellular Mg2+ levels and maintain 
cell integrity upon Mg2+ depletion. Upon development of a functional tagged
derivative of MgtS, we found that MgtS interacts with MgtA to increase the levels
of this P-type ATPase Mg2+ transporter under Mg2+-limiting conditions.
Correspondingly, the effects of MgtS upon Mg2+ limitation are lost in a ∆mgtA
mutant, and MgtA overexpression can suppress the ∆mgtS phenotype. MgtS
stabilization of MgtA provides an additional layer of regulation of this tightly 
controlled Mg2+ transporter and adds to the list of small proteins that regulate 
inner membrane transporters.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1703415114 
PMCID: PMC5465934
PMID: 28512220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. J Membr Biol. 2017 Aug;250(4):367-378. doi: 10.1007/s00232-016-9923-0. Epub 2016 
Aug 26.

Functional Membrane Microdomains Organize Signaling Networks in Bacteria.

Wagner RM(1)(2)(3), Kricks L(1)(2)(3), Lopez D(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Infectious Diseases (ZINF), University of Würzburg, 97080,
Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg,
97080, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology (CNB), Spanish Research Council (CSIC),
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28050, Madrid,
Spain.
(4)Research Centre for Infectious Diseases (ZINF), University of Würzburg, 97080,
Würzburg, Germany. dlopez@cnb.csic.es.
(5)Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg,
97080, Würzburg, Germany. dlopez@cnb.csic.es.
(6)National Center for Biotechnology (CNB), Spanish Research Council (CSIC),
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28050, Madrid,
Spain. dlopez@cnb.csic.es.

Membrane organization is usually associated with the correct function of a number
of cellular processes in eukaryotic cells as diverse as signal transduction,
protein sorting, membrane trafficking, or pathogen invasion. It has been recently
discovered that bacterial membranes are able to compartmentalize their signal
transduction pathways in functional membrane microdomains (FMMs). In this review 
article, we discuss the biological significance of the existence of FMMs in
bacteria and comment on possible beneficial roles that FMMs play on the harbored 
signal transduction cascades. Moreover, four different membrane-associated signal
transduction cascades whose functions are linked to the integrity of FMMs are
introduced, and the specific role that FMMs play in stabilizing and promoting
interactions of their signaling components is discussed. Altogether, FMMs seem to
play a relevant role in promoting more efficient activation of signal
transduction cascades in bacterial cells and show that bacteria are more
sophisticated organisms than previously appreciated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-016-9923-0 
PMID: 27566471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (fic)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Jun;5(6):e1193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001193. Epub 
2011 Jun 7.

Interferon-γ and proliferation responses to Salmonella enterica Serotype Typhi
proteins in patients with S. Typhi Bacteremia in Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Sheikh A(1), Khanam F, Sayeed MA, Rahman T, Pacek M, Hu Y, Rollins A, Bhuiyan MS,
Rollins S, Kalsy A, Arifuzzaman M, Leung DT, Sarracino DA, Krastins B, Charles
RC, Larocque RC, Cravioto A, Calderwood SB, Brooks WA, Harris JB, Labaer J, Qadri
F, Ryan ET.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B),
Dhaka, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi is a human-restricted
intracellular pathogen and the cause of typhoid fever. Cellular immune responses 
are required to control and clear Salmonella infection. Despite this, there are
limited data on cellular immune responses in humans infected with wild type S.
Typhi.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: For this work, we used an automated approach to
purify a subset of S. Typhi proteins identified in previous antibody-based
immuno-affinity screens and antigens known to be expressed in vivo, including
StaF-putative fimbrial protein-STY0202, StbB-fimbrial chaperone-STY0372,
CsgF-involved in curli production-STY1177, CsgD- putative regulatory
protein-STY1179, OppA-periplasmic oligopeptide binding protein precursor-STY1304,
PagC-outer membrane invasion protein-STY1878, and conserved hypothetical
protein-STY2195; we also generated and analyzed a crude membrane preparation of
S. Typhi (MP). In comparison to samples collected from uninfected Bangladeshi and
North American participants, we detected significant interferon-γ responses in
PBMCs stimulated with MP, StaF, StbB, CsgF, CsgD, OppA, STY2195, and PagC in
patients bacteremic with S. Typhi in Bangladesh. The majority of interferon-γ
expressing T cells were CD4 cells, although CD8 responses also occurred. We also 
assessed cellular proliferation responses in bacteremic patients, and confirmed
increased responses in infected individuals to MP, StaF, STY2195, and PagC in
convalescent compared to acute phase samples and compared to controls. StaF is a 
fimbrial protein homologous to E. coli YadK, and contains a Pfam motif thought to
be involved in cellular adhesion. PagC is expressed in vivo under the control of 
the virulence-associated PhoP-regulon required for intra-macrophage survival of
Salmonella. STY2195 is a conserved hypothetical protein of unknown function.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first analysis of cellular immune responses 
to purified S. Typhi antigens in patients with typhoid fever. These results
indicate that patients generate significant CD4 and CD8 interferon-γ responses to
specific S. Typhi antigens during typhoid fever, and that these responses are
elevated at the time of clinical presentation. These observations suggest that an
interferon-γ based detection system could be used to diagnose individuals with
typhoid fever during the acute stage of illness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001193 
PMCID: PMC3110156
PMID: 21666798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((phoP) AND (proP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2004 May;186(10):3006-14.

Signal transduction cascade between EvgA/EvgS and PhoP/PhoQ two-component systems
of Escherichia coli.

Eguchi Y(1), Okada T, Minagawa S, Oshima T, Mori H, Yamamoto K, Ishihama A,
Utsumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture,
Kinki University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional analysis of a constitutively active mutant of the EvgA/EvgS
two-component system of Escherichia coli resulted in enhanced expression of 13
PhoP/PhoQ-regulated genes, crcA, hemL, mgtA, ompT, phoP, phoQ, proP, rstA, rstB, 
slyB, ybjG, yrbL, and mgrB. This regulatory network between the two systems also 
occurred as a result of overproduction of the EvgA regulator; however, enhanced
transcription of the phoPQ genes did not further activate expression of the
PhoP/PhoQ-regulated genes. These results demonstrated signal transduction from
the EvgA/EvgS system to the PhoP/PhoQ system in E. coli and also identified the
genes that required the two systems for enhanced expression. This is one example 
of the intricate signal transduction networks that are posited to exist in E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.10.3006-3014.2004 
PMCID: PMC400602
PMID: 15126461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((narL) AND (narX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Jan;23(1):5-14. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15293. Epub 2020
Nov 10.

Sensing of O2 and nitrate by bacteria: alternative strategies for transcriptional
regulation of nitrate respiration by O2 and nitrate.

Unden G(1), Klein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, 55099, Germany.

Many bacteria are able to use O2 and nitrate as alternative electron acceptors
for respiration. Strategies for regulation in response to O2 and nitrate can vary
considerably. In the paradigmatic system of E. coli (and γ-proteobacteria),
regulation by O2 and nitrate is established by the O2 -sensor FNR and the
two-component system NarX-NarL (for nitrate regulation). Expression of narGHJI is
regulated by the binding of FNR and NarL to the promoter. A similar strategy by
individual regulation in response to O2 and nitrate is verified in many genera by
the use of various types of regulators. Otherwise, in the soil bacteria Bacillus 
subtilis (Firmicutes) and Streptomyces (Actinobacteria), nitrate respiration is
subject to anaerobic induction, without direct nitrate induction. In contrast,
the NreA-NreB-NreC two-component system of Staphylococcus (Firmicutes) performs
joint sensing of O2 and nitrate by interacting O2 and nitrate sensors. The O2
-sensor NreB phosphorylates the response regulator NreC to activate narGHJI
expression. NreC-P transmits the signal for anaerobiosis to the promoter. The
nitrate sensor NreA modulates NreB function by converting NreB in the absence of 
nitrate from the kinase to a phosphatase that dephosphorylates NreC-P. Thus,
widely different strategies for coordinating the response to O2 and nitrate have 
evolved in bacteria.

© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15293 
PMID: 33089915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biosens Bioelectron. 2020 Nov 15;168:112523. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112523.
Epub 2020 Aug 20.

A designed whole-cell biosensor for live diagnosis of gut inflammation through
nitrate sensing.

Woo SG(1), Moon SJ(2), Kim SK(3), Kim TH(1), Lim HS(3), Yeon GH(1), Sung BH(1),
Lee CH(2), Lee SG(4), Hwang JH(5), Lee DH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea;
Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea.
(3)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea.
(4)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: sglee@kribb.re.kr.
(5)Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea;
Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
coccs99@kribb.re.kr.
(6)Synthetic Biology and Bioengineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea;
Department of Biosystems and Bioengineering, KRIBB School of Biotechnology,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: dhlee@kribb.re.kr.

Microbes reprogrammed using advanced genetic circuits are envisaged as emerging
living diagnostics for a wide range of diseases and play key roles in regulating 
gut microbiota to treat disease-associated symptoms in a non-invasive manner.
Here, we developed a designer probiotic Escherichia coli that senses and responds
to nitrate, a biomarker of gut inflammation. To this end, we first employed the
NarX-NarL two-component regulatory system in E. coli to construct a
nitrate-responsive genetic circuit. Next, we optimized the nitrate biosensor for 
the best performance using measures of sensitivity and specificity. We then
introduced this genetic circuit into a probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917. We
demonstrated that the designed biosensor can sense elevated nitrate levels during
gut inflammation in mice with native gut microbiota. Moreover, using Boolean AND 
gate, we generated a genetically encoded biosensor for simultaneous sensing of
the thiosulfate and nitrate biomarkers, thus increasing the tool's specificity
for diagnosing gut inflammation. The nitrate-responsive genetic circuit will
enable new approaches for non-invasive diagnostics of inflammation-associated
diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112523 
PMID: 32871497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem J. 2020 Aug 14;477(15):2807-2820. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200408.

Activation by NarL at the Escherichia coli ogt promoter.

Ruanto P(1), Chismon DL(1), Hothersall J(1), Godfrey RE(1), Lee DJ(1)(2), Busby
SJW(1), Browning DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Infection and School of Biosciences, University 
of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, U.K.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Birmingham City
University, Birmingham B15 3TN, U.K.

The Escherichia coli NarX/NarL two-component response-regulator system regulates 
gene expression in response to nitrate ions and the NarL protein is a global
transcription factor, which activates transcript initiation at many target
promoters. One such target, the E. coli ogt promoter, which controls the
expression of an O6-alkylguanine-DNA-alkyltransferase, is dependent on NarL
binding to two DNA targets centred at positions -44.5 and -77.5 upstream from the
transcript start. Here, we describe ogt promoter derivatives that can be
activated solely by NarL binding either at position -44.5 or position -77.5. We
show that NarL can also activate the ogt promoter when located at position -67.5.
We present data to argue that NarL-dependent activation of transcript initiation 
at the ogt promoter results from a direct interaction between NarL and a
determinant in the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase α subunit.
Footprinting experiments show that, at the -44.5 promoter, NarL and the
C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase α subunit bind to opposite faces of
promoter DNA, suggesting an unusual mechanism of transcription activation. Our
work suggests new organisations for activator-dependent transcription at
promoters and future applications for biotechnology.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200408 
PMCID: PMC7419079
PMID: 32662815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nat Chem Biol. 2020 Feb;16(2):179-187. doi: 10.1038/s41589-019-0429-9. Epub 2019 
Dec 16.

Artificial signaling in mammalian cells enabled by prokaryotic two-component
system.

Mazé A(1), Benenson Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel,
Switzerland. kobi.benenson@bsse.ethz.ch.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2020 Feb;16(2):110-111.

Augmenting live cells with new signal transduction capabilities is a key
objective in genetic engineering and synthetic biology. We showed earlier that
two-component signaling pathways could function in mammalian cells, albeit while 
losing their ligand sensitivity. Here, we show how to transduce small-molecule
ligands in a dose-dependent fashion into gene expression in mammalian cells using
two-component signaling machinery. First, we engineer mutually complementing
truncated mutants of a histidine kinase unable to dimerize and phosphorylate the 
response regulator. Next, we fuse these mutants to protein domains capable of
ligand-induced dimerization, which restores the phosphoryl transfer in a
ligand-dependent manner. Cytoplasmic ligands are transduced by facilitating
mutant dimerization in the cytoplasm, while extracellular ligands trigger
dimerization at the inner side of a plasma membrane. These findings point to the 
potential of two-component regulatory systems as enabling tools for orthogonal
signaling pathways in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41589-019-0429-9 
PMCID: PMC6982536
PMID: 31844302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biosci. 2017 Dec;42(4):565-573.

Re-engineering the two-component systems as light-regulated in Escherichia coli.

Ma S(1), Luo S, Wu LI, Liang Z, Wu JR.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230000,
China.

Bacteria live in environments with dynamic changes. To sense and respond to
different external stimuli, bacteria make use of various sensor-response
circuits, called two-component systems (TCSs). A TCS comprises a histidine
protein kinase (HK) sensing environmental stimuli and a response regulator
protein (RR) regulating downstream genes. The two components are coupled via a
phosphorylation control mechanism. In a recent study, we adopted an optogenetics 
approach to re-engineer the sensor HKs in Escherichia coli as a light-sensing
fusion protein. We constructed a light-controllable HK by replacing the original 
signal-specific sensing domain of HK with the light-sensing domain of Cph1 from
Cyanobacteria Synechocystis, so that HK can be investigated by red light. Here,
we extended the study to other 16 HK-RR TCSs and constructed a library of
light-responsible HK-Cph1 chimeras. By taking the NarX-NarL system as an example,
we demonstrated the light responsiveness of the constructed chimera and
investigated the frequency response of the NarXNarL system. The constructed
library serves as a toolkit for future TCS study using optogenetics approach.

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-017-9711-8 
PMID: 29229875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2015 Oct;197(20):3294-306. doi: 10.1128/JB.00436-15. Epub 2015 Aug
10.

Cross Talk Inhibition Nullified by a Receiver Domain Missense Substitution.

Huynh TN(1), Lin HY(1), Noriega CE(2), Lin AV(3), Stewart V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Food Science Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(3)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Davis, California, USA vjstewart@ucdavis.edu.

In two-component signal transduction, a sensor protein transmitter module
controls cognate receiver domain phosphorylation. Most receiver domain sequences 
contain a small residue (Gly or Ala) at position T + 1 just distal to the
essential Thr or Ser residue that forms part of the active site. However, some
members of the NarL receiver subfamily have a large hydrophobic residue at
position T + 1. Our laboratory previously isolated a NarL mutant in which the T +
1 residue Val-88 was replaced with an orthodox small Ala. This NarL V88A mutant
confers a striking phenotype in which high-level target operon expression is both
signal (nitrate) and sensor (NarX and NarQ) independent. This suggests that the
NarL V88A protein is phosphorylated by cross talk from noncognate sources.
Although cross talk was enhanced in ackA null strains that accumulate acetyl
phosphate, it persisted in pta ackA double null strains that cannot synthesize
this compound and was observed also in narL(+) strains. This indicates that
acetate metabolism has complex roles in mediating NarL cross talk. Contrariwise, 
cross talk was sharply diminished in an arcB barA double null strain, suggesting 
that the encoded sensors contribute substantially to NarL V88A cross talk.
Separately, the V88A substitution altered the in vitro rates of NarL
autodephosphorylation and transmitter-stimulated dephosphorylation and decreased 
affinity for the cognate sensor, NarX. Together, these experiments show that the 
residue at position T + 1 can strongly influence two distinct aspects of receiver
domain function, the autodephosphorylation rate and cross talk
inhibition.IMPORTANCE: Many bacterial species contain a dozen or more discrete
sensor-response regulator two-component systems that convert a specific input
into a distinct output pattern. Cross talk, the unwanted transfer of signals
between circuits, occurs when a response regulator is phosphorylated
inappropriately from a noncognate source. Cross talk is inhibited in part by the 
high interaction specificity between cognate sensor-response regulator pairs.
This study shows that a relatively subtle missense change from Val to Ala
nullifies cross talk inhibition, enabling at least two noncognate sensors to
enforce an inappropriate output independently of the relevant input.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00436-15 
PMCID: PMC4573717
PMID: 26260457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2015 Jul;161(7):1504-15. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000092. Epub 
2015 Apr 13.

Sensor-response regulator interactions in a cross-regulated signal transduction
network.

Huynh TN(1), Chen LL(2), Stewart V(3).

Author information: 
(1)1​ Food Science Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA,
95616-8665, USA.
(2)2​ Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA.
(3)2​ Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA 1​ Food Science Graduate Group, University of
California, Davis, CA, 95616-8665, USA.

Two-component signal transduction involves phosphoryl transfer between a
histidine kinase sensor and a response regulator effector. The nitrate-responsive
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli represent a
paradigm for a cross-regulation network, in which the paralogous sensor-response 
regulator pairs, NarX-NarL and NarQ-NarP, exhibit both cognate (e.g. NarX-NarL)
and non-cognate (e.g. NarQ-NarL) interactions to control output. Here, we
describe results from bacterial adenylate cyclase two-hybrid (BACTH) analysis to 
examine sensor dimerization as well as interaction between sensor-response
regulator cognate and non-cognate pairs. Although results from BACTH analysis
indicated that the NarX and NarQ sensors interact with each other, results from
intragenic complementation tests demonstrate that they do not form functional
heterodimers. Additionally, intragenic complementation shows that both NarX and
NarQ undergo intermolecular autophosphorylation, deviating from the previously
reported correlation between DHp (dimerization and histidyl phosphotransfer)
domain loop handedness and autophosphorylation mode. Results from BACTH analysis 
revealed robust interactions for the NarX-NarL, NarQ-NarL and NarQ-NarP pairs but
a much weaker interaction for the NarX-NarP pair. This demonstrates that
asymmetrical cross-regulation results from differential binding affinities
between different sensor-regulator pairs. Finally, results indicate that the NarL
effector (DNA-binding) domain inhibits NarX-NarL interaction. Missense
substitutions at receiver domain residue Ser-80 enhanced NarX-NarL interaction,
apparently by destabilizing the NarL receiver-effector domain interface.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000092 
PMCID: PMC4635505
PMID: 25873583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051643. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

A Crp-dependent two-component system regulates nitrate and nitrite respiration in
Shewanella oneidensis.

Dong Y(1), Wang J, Fu H, Zhou G, Shi M, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

We have previously illustrated the nitrate/nitrite respiratory pathway of
Shewanella oneidensis, which is renowned for its remarkable versatility in
respiration. Here we investigated the systems regulating the pathway with a
reliable approach which enables characterization of mutants impaired in
nitrate/nitrite respiration by guaranteeing biomass. The S. oneidensis genome
encodes an Escherichia coli NarQ/NarX homolog SO3981 and two E. coli NarP/NarL
homologs SO1860 and SO3982. Results of physiological characterization and
mutational analyses demonstrated that S. oneidensis possesses a single
two-component system (TCS) for regulation of nitrate/nitrite respiration,
consisting of the sensor kinase SO3981(NarQ) and the response regulator
SO3982(NarP). The TCS directly controls the transcription of nap and nrfA (genes 
encoding nitrate and nitrite reductases, respectively) but regulates the former
less tightly than the latter. Additionally, phosphorylation at residue 57 of
SO3982 is essential for its DNA-binding capacity. At the global control level,
Crp is found to regulate expression of narQP as well as nap and nrfA. In contrast
to NarP-NarQ, Crp is more essential for nap rather than nrfA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051643 
PMCID: PMC3519889
PMID: 23240049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Microbiology (Reading). 2012 Jun;158(Pt 6):1402-1413. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.059048-0. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Legless pathogens: how bacterial physiology provides the key to understanding
pathogenicity.

Cole JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

This review argues that knowledge of microbial physiology and metabolism is a
prerequisite to understanding mechanisms of pathogenicity. The ability of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae to cope with stresses such as those found during infection 
requires a sialyltransferase to sialylate its lipopolysaccharide using
host-derived CMP-NANA in the human bloodstream, the ability to oxidize lactate
that is abundant in the human body, outer-membrane lipoproteins that provide the 
first line of protection against oxidative and nitrosative stress, regulation of 
NO reduction independently from the nitrite reductase that forms NO, an extra
haem group on the C-terminal extension of a cytochrome oxidase subunit, and a
respiratory capacity far in excess of metabolic requirements. These properties
are all normal components of neisserial physiology; they would all fail rigid
definitions of a pathogenicity determinant. In anaerobic cultures of enteric
bacteria, duplicate pathways for nitrate reduction to ammonia provide a selective
advantage when nitrate is either abundant or scarce. Selection of these
alternative pathways is in part regulated by two parallel two-component
regulatory systems. NarX-NarL primarily ensures that nitrate is reduced in
preference to thermodynamically less favourable terminal electron acceptors, but 
NarQ-NarP facilitates reduction of limited quantities of nitrate or other, less
favourable, terminal electron acceptors in preference to fermentative growth. How
enteric bacteria repair damage caused by nitrosative and oxidative damage
inflicted by host defences is less well understood. In both N. gonorrhoeae and
Escherichia coli, parallel pathways that duplicate particular biochemical
functions are far from redundant, but fulfil specific physiological roles.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.059048-0 
PMID: 22493300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Infect Immun. 2011 Oct;79(10):4218-26. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05395-11. Epub 2011 Aug
8.

Anaerobic respiration of Escherichia coli in the mouse intestine.

Jones SA(1), Gibson T, Maltby RC, Chowdhury FZ, Stewart V, Cohen PS, Conway T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019-0245, USA.

The intestine is inhabited by a large microbial community consisting primarily of
anaerobes and, to a lesser extent, facultative anaerobes, such as Escherichia
coli, which we have shown requires aerobic respiration to compete successfully in
the mouse intestine (S. A. Jones et al., Infect. Immun. 75:4891-4899, 2007). If
facultative anaerobes efficiently lower oxygen availability in the intestine,
then their sustained growth must also depend on anaerobic metabolism. In support 
of this idea, mutants lacking nitrate reductase or fumarate reductase have
extreme colonization defects. Here, we further explore the role of anaerobic
respiration in colonization using the streptomycin-treated mouse model. We found 
that respiratory electron flow is primarily via the naphthoquinones, which pass
electrons to cytochrome bd oxidase and the anaerobic terminal reductases. We
found that E. coli uses nitrate and fumarate in the intestine, but not nitrite,
dimethyl sulfoxide, or trimethylamine N-oxide. Competitive colonizations revealed
that cytochrome bd oxidase is more advantageous than nitrate reductase or
fumarate reductase. Strains lacking nitrate reductase outcompeted fumarate
reductase mutants once the nitrate concentration in cecal mucus reached
submillimolar levels, indicating that fumarate is the more important anaerobic
electron acceptor in the intestine because nitrate is limiting. Since nitrate is 
highest in the absence of E. coli, we conclude that E. coli is the only bacterium
in the streptomycin-treated mouse large intestine that respires nitrate. Lastly, 
we demonstrated that a mutant lacking the NarXL regulator (activator of the NarG 
system), but not a mutant lacking the NarP-NarQ regulator, has a colonization
defect, consistent with the advantage provided by NarG. The emerging picture is
one in which gene regulation is tuned to balance expression of the terminal
reductases that E. coli uses to maximize its competitiveness and achieve the
highest possible population in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05395-11 
PMCID: PMC3187261
PMID: 21825069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((acnA) AND (prpC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 2;7(1):1352. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01552-3.

Mechanistic insights into manganese oxidation of a soil-borne Mn(II)-oxidizing
Escherichia coli strain by global proteomic and genetic analyses.

Wang Z(1), Wang J(2), Liu J(1), Chen H(1), Li M(1), Li L(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)Agricultural Bio-resources Institute, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Fuzhou, 350003, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, China. lilin@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

An iTRAQ-based comparative and quantitative proteomics analysis of a soil-borne
Mn(II)-oxidizing bacterium, Escherichia coli MB266, was conducted during the
exponential and stationary growth phases. A total of 1850 proteins were
identified in 4 samples, of which 373 and 456 proteins were significantly up- or 
down-regulated in at least one pairwise comparison, respectively. The iTRAQ data 
indicated that several enzymes involved in fatty acid metabolism (i.e., FabA,
FabD and FabZ) and pyruvate metabolism (particularly pyruvate oxidase PoxB) were 
significantly up-regulated, while those related to the tricarboxylic acid cycle
(such as FrdB, FumB and AcnA) and methylcitrate cycle (i.e., PrpC) were
inactivated in the presence of 1 mM Mn(II); the amounts of some stress response
and signal transduction system-related proteins (i.e., Spy) were remarkably
increased, and the cold shock protein CspD was significantly up-regulated during 
the exponential growth phase. However, all verified heat shock proteins remained 
unchanged. The reactive oxygen species response and some redox enzymes might also
be involved in Mn oxidation processes. The involvement of several cellular
proteins in Mn(II) oxidation, including PoxB, Spy and MCO266, was further
confirmed by gene disruption and expression complementation experiments. Based on
these results, a signal transduction mechanism coupled to Mn oxidation was
proposed.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01552-3 
PMCID: PMC5430989
PMID: 28465578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((acnA) AND (prpD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 2002 Jan;148(Pt 1):133-146. doi:
10.1099/00221287-148-1-133.

AcnC of Escherichia coli is a 2-methylcitrate dehydratase (PrpD) that can use
citrate and isocitrate as substrates.

Blank L(1), Green J(1), Guest JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK1.

Escherichia coli possesses two well-characterized aconitases (AcnA and AcnB) and 
a minor activity (designated AcnC) that is retained by acnAB double mutants and
represents no more than 5% of total wild-type aconitase activity. Here it is
shown that a 2-methylcitrate dehydratase (PrpD) encoded by the prpD gene of the
propionate catabolic operon (prpRBCDE) is identical to AcnC. Inactivation of prpD
abolished the residual aconitase activity of an AcnAB-null strain, whereas
inactivation of ybhJ, an unidentified acnA paralogue, had no significant effect
on AcnC activity. Purified PrpD catalysed the dehydration of citrate and
isocitrate but was most active with 2-methylcitrate. PrpD also catalysed the
dehydration of several other hydroxy acids but failed to hydrate cis-aconitate
and related substrates containing double bonds, indicating that PrpD is not a
typical aconitase but a dehydratase. Purified PrpD was shown to be a monomeric
iron-sulphur protein (M(r) 54000) having one unstable [2Fe-2S] cluster per
monomer, which is needed for maximum catalytic activity and can be reconstituted 
by treatment with Fe(2+) under reducing conditions.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-148-1-133 
PMID: 11782506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fnr) AND (hypA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Nov 7;228(1):81-6.

FNR-mediated regulation of hyp expression in Escherichia coli.

Messenger SL(1), Green J.

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The hypA-E operon is involved in the maturation of all three NiFe hydrogenases in
Escherichia coli. Two hyp promoters have been described; a sigma54-dependent
promoter upstream of hypA, and a sigma70-dependent promoter (PhypA) within the
hypA coding region. Here it is shown that the oxygen-responsive transcription
factor FNR regulates PhypA under anaerobic conditions only. PhypA does not
possess a canonical FNR recognition sequence, but two FNR half-sites are present.
Studies using PHYPA::lacZ fusions carrying lesions in one or both FNR half-sites 
indicated that although some residual anaerobic activity was retained by the
promoter containing only the downstream FNR half-site, both half-sites are
required for maximal PhypA activity in vivo. In vitro gel retardation analysis
suggested that the primary interaction occurs at the downstream FNR half-site.
Possible explanations for these observations and the implications for other
FNR-regulated promoters are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00726-2 
PMID: 14612240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 1991 Jan;5(1):123-35.

Molecular characterization of an operon (hyp) necessary for the activity of the
three hydrogenase isoenzymes in Escherichia coli.

Lutz S(1), Jacobi A, Schlensog V, Böhm R, Sawers G, Böck A.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität München, FRG.

The 58/59 min region of the Escherichia coli chromosome contains two divergently 
oriented gene clusters coding for proteins with a function in hydrogenase
formation. One cluster (the hyc operon), transcribed counterclockwise with
respect to the E. coli chromosome, codes for gene products with a structural role
in hydrogenase 3 formation (Böhm et al., 1990). The nucleotide sequence of the
divergently transcribed operon (hyp) has been determined. It contains five genes,
all of which are expressed in vivo in a T7 promoter/polymerase system, and the
sizes of the synthesized products correspond with those predicted from the amino 
acid sequence. Complementation analysis of previously characterized mutants
showed that the hypB, hypC and hypD genes have a function in the formation of all
three hydrogenase isoenzymes, lesions in hypB being complemented by high nickel
ion concentration in the medium. Prevention of hypBCDE gene expression led to an 
altered electrophoretic pattern of hydrogenase 1 and 2 constituent subunits,
indicating increased chemical or proteolytic subunits, Under fermentative growth 
conditions, operon expression was governed by an NtrA-dependent promoter lying
upstream of hypA working together with an fnr gene product-dependent promoter
which was localized within the hypA gene. The latter (operon-internal) promoter
is responsible for hypBCDE transcription under non-fermentative conditions when
the -24/-12 NtrA-dependent promoter upstream of hypA is silent.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1991.tb01833.x 
PMID: 1849603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fnr) AND (hemN)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2005 May;187(10):3329-38.

Transcription activation in vitro by the Bradyrhizobium japonicum regulatory
protein FixK2.

Mesa S(1), Ucurum Z, Hennecke H, Fischer HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, CH-8093
Zürich, Switzerland. mesam@micro.biol.ethz.ch

In Bradyrhizobium japonicum, the N2-fixing root nodule endosymbiont of soybean, a
group of genes required for microaerobic, anaerobic, or symbiotic growth is
controlled by FixK2, a key regulator that is part of the FixLJ-FixK2 cascade.
FixK2 belongs to the family of cyclic AMP receptor protein/fumarate and nitrate
reductase (CRP/FNR) transcription factors that recognize a palindromic DNA motif 
(CRP/FNR box) associated with the regulated promoters. Here, we report on a
biochemical analysis of FixK2 and its transcription activation activity in vitro.
FixK2 was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified as a soluble N-terminally
histidine-tagged protein. Gel filtration experiments revealed that increasing the
protein concentration shifts the monomer-dimer equilibrium toward the dimer.
Purified FixK2 productively interacted with the B. japonicum sigma80-RNA
polymerase holoenzyme, but not with E. coli sigma70-RNA polymerase holoenzyme, to
activate transcription from the B. japonicum fixNOQP, fixGHIS, and hemN2
promoters in vitro. Furthermore, FixK2 activated transcription from the E. coli
FF(-41.5) model promoter, again only in concert with B. japonicum RNA polymerase.
All of these promoters are so-called class II CRP/FNR-type promoters. We showed
by specific mutagenesis that the FixK2 box at nucleotide position -40.5 in the
hemN2 promoter, but not that at -78.5, is crucial for activation both in vivo and
in vitro, which argues against recognition of a potential class III promoter.
Given the lack of any evidence for the presence of a cofactor in purified FixK2, 
we surmise that FixK2 alone is sufficient to activate in vitro transcription to
at least a basal level. This contrasts with all well-studied CRP/FNR-type
proteins, which do require coregulators.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.10.3329-3338.2005 
PMCID: PMC1112000
PMID: 15866917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 1999 Mar;31(6):1681-94.

Multiple transcription factors of the FNR family in denitrifying Pseudomonas
stutzeri: characterization of four fnr-like genes, regulatory responses and
cognate metabolic processes.

Vollack KU(1), Härtig E, Körner H, Zumft WG.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Karlsruhe, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Microbiol 1999 Jul;33(2):442.

Pseudomonas stutzeri is a facultative anaerobic bacterium with the capability of 
denitrification. In searching for regulators that control the expression of this 
trait in response to oxygen withdrawal, we have found an unprecedented
multiplicity of four genes encoding transcription factors of the FNR family. The 
fnrA gene encodes a genuine FNR-type regulator, which is expressed constitutively
and controls the cytochrome cbb3-type terminal oxidase (the cco operon),
cytochrome c peroxidase (the ccp gene) and the oxygen-independent
coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (the hemN gene), in addition to its previously
demonstrated role in arginine catabolism (the arc operon). The fnr homologues
dnrD, dnrE and dnrS encode regulators of a new subgroup within the FNR family.
Their main distinctive feature is the lack of cysteine residues for complexing
the [4Fe-4S] centre of redox-active FNR-type regulators. However, they form a
phylogenetic lineage separate from the FixK branch of FNR proteins, which also
lack this cysteine signature. We have studied the expression of the dnr genes
under aerobic, oxygen-limited and denitrifying conditions. DnrD is a key
regulator of denitrification by selective activation of the genes for cytochrome 
cd1 nitrite reductase and NO reductase. The dnrD gene is part of the 30 kb region
carrying denitrification genes of P. stutzeri. Transcription of dnrD was
activated in O2-limited cells and particularly strongly in denitrifying cells,
but was not under the control of FnrA. In response to denitrifying growth
conditions, dnrD was transcribed as part of an operon together with genes
downstream and upstream of dnrD. dnrS was found about 9 kb upstream of dnrD, next
to the nrdD gene for anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase. The transcription of
dnrS required FnrA in O2-limited cells. Mutation of dnrS affected nrdD and the
expression of ferredoxin I as an element of the oxidative stress response. The
dnrE gene is part of the nar region encoding functions for respiratory nitrate
reduction. We found the highest amount of dnrE transcripts in aerobically
nitrate-challenged cells. The gene was transcribed from two promoters, P1 and P2,
of which promoter P1 was under the control of the nitrate response regulator
NarL. The multiplicity of FNR factors in P. stutzeri underlines the versatility
of the FNR scaffold to serve for transcriptional regulation directed at anaerobic
or nitrate-activated metabolic processes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01302.x 
PMID: 10209742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1998 Feb;144 ( Pt 2):441-448. doi:
10.1099/00221287-144-2-441.

Localization of denitrification genes on the chromosomal map of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Vollack KU(1), Xie J(1), Härtig E(1), Römling U(2), Zumft WG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Universität Fridericiana, D-76128 Karlsruhe,
Germany.
(2)Karolinska Institutet, MTC, Department of Bacteriology, Box 280, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Cleavage of chromosomal DNA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO by Spel and Dpnl has 
been used together with PFGE and Southern hybridization to establish the map
location of the following principal denitrification genes: narGH (encoding the
large and small subunits of respiratory nitrate reductase), nirS (cytochrome-cd1 
nitrite reductase), nirE (uroporphyrinogen-III methyltransferase for haem d1
biosynthesis), norCB (nitric-oxide reductase complex), nosZ (nitrous-oxide
reductase) and nosA (an outer-membrane protein and OprC homologue). The study
also included several genes related to anaerobic or microaerophilic metabolism:
napA (encoding the catalytic subunit of the periplasmic nitrate reductase), ccoN 
(catalytic subunit of the cytochrome-cbb3 oxidase), hemN (oxygen-independent
coproporphyrinogen-III oxidase), an fnr-like regulatory gene, and azu and fdxA
(electron carriers azurin and ferredoxin, respectively). Genes necessary for
denitrification are concentrated at 20 to 36 min on the P. aeruginosa chromosome,
where they form three separate loci, the nir-nor, nar and nos gene clusters.
Genomic DNA of Pseudomonas stutzeri ZoBell was also subjected to Spel restriction
and Southern analysis to assign denitrification genes to individual fragments. A 
homologue of nosA encoding a putative component of the Cu-processing apparatus
for nitrous-oxide reductase was identified. In both P. aeruginosa and P. stutzeri
there is evidence for the linkage of anr (fnrA) with hemN and ccoN; and for the
presence of a napA gene.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-144-2-441 
PMID: 9493381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((marA) AND (waaQ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;29(2):152-7.

[Effects of exogenous carbon monoxide-releasing molecules 2 on the vitality and
toxicity of E.coli].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu XF(1), Liu DD, Sun BW, Liang F, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of exogenous carbon monoxide-releasing
molecules 2 (CORM-2) on the vitality and toxicity of E. coli ATCC 25922, and to
analyze the potential mechanism.
METHODS: (1) In vitro experiments. Standard strains of E. coli ATCC 25922 were
divided into groups A (without addition), B, C, D, and E according to the random 
number table, and then the latter 4 groups were respectively cultured with 1.2
mmol/L CORM-2, 1.6 mmol/L CORM-2, 1.2 mmol/L inactive CORM-2 (iCORM-2), 1.6
mmol/L iCORM-2, with six samples in each group. After being cultured for 0, 3, 5,
8, 10, 12, 16, 20, 24, 27, 30, 48 hours, proliferative vitality of E. coli was
examined (denoted as absorption value under 600 nm wavelength), and bacteria
number was counted. Other standard strains of E. coli ATCC 25922 were divided
into groups F (without addition) and G (cultured with 0.8 mmol/L CORM-2), the
expressions of genes fliA, dnaK, marA, and waaQ related to E. coli were detected 
by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. (2) In vivo experiments. Other standard
strains of E. coli ATCC 25922 were grouped as A', B', C', D', and E' and treated 
with the same method as that in groups A, B, C, D, and E, and 0.5 mL bacterial
liquid of each group were collected when the absorption value of bacterial liquid
in group A' was equal to 0.4 (under 600 nm wavelength). Seventy-two C57BL/6 mice 
were divided into groups, namely blank control (without treatment), H, I, J, K,
and L according to the random number table, with 12 mice in each group. The mice 
in the latter 5 groups were intraperitoneally injected with 0.5 mL bacterial
suspension of groups A', B', C', D', and E' respectively. After injection,
general condition of mice in groups H, I, J, K, and L was observed. The serum
levels of TNF-α and IL-6 were determined at post injection hour (PIH) 6, 12. The 
liver and lung samples were harvested for determination of myeloperoxidase (MPO) 
activity at PIH 12. The same process was carried out in blank control group. Data
were processed with repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA), factorial
design ANOVA, one-way ANOVA, and t test.
RESULTS: (1) In vitro experiments. Compared with those of groups A and D, the
proliferative vitality and bacteria number of E. coli in group B were all
decreased (with F values respectively 1170.80, 217.52, P values all below 0.01). 
Compared with those of groups A and E, the proliferative vitality and bacteria
number of E. coli in group C were also obviously decreased (with F values
respectively 7948.34, 14 432.85, P values all below 0.01). Compared with those in
group F, the expression of fliA was downregulated, while the expressions of dnaK,
marA, and waaQ were upregulated in group G (with t values 30.28, -165.54,
-168.88, -187.28, P values all below 0.01). (2) In vivo experiments. Symptoms
including listlessness and tachypnea were observed in mice in groups H, K, and L,
and they were ameliorated or not obvious in groups I and J. At PIH 6, the serum
levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in groups H and K were respectively (647.3 ± 3.8) pg/mL,
(3.44 ± 0.22) ng/mL and (639.3 ± 0.8) pg/mL, (2.47 ± 0.32) ng/mL, which were
obviously higher than those in group I [(124.6 ± 10.7) pg/mL, (1.03 ± 0.16)
ng/mL, with t values from 15.22 to 84.03, P values all below 0.01]. The serum
levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in group J at PIH 6, 12 were also obviously decreased as
compared with those in groups H and L (with t values from 19.27 to 245.34, P
values all below 0.01). MPO activity of liver and lung tissues were significantly
attenuated in group I at PIH 12 as compared with those in groups H and K, and it 
was also attenuated in group J when compared with those in groups H and L (with t
values respectively from 17.36 to 18.92 and 2.35 to 3.61, P values all below
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: CORM-2 can obviously inhibit the vitality and toxicity of E. coli,
which might be attributable to regulation of expressions of genes fliA, dnaK,
marA, and waaQ of E. coli.


PMID: 23985204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((marA) AND (glpX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Feb;69(2):390-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkt352. Epub 2013 
Sep 15.

Regulation of acrAB expression by cellular metabolites in Escherichia coli.

Ruiz C(1), Levy SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance and the Department of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Multidrug efflux pumps mediate resistance to antibiotics and other
toxic compounds. We studied the role of AcrAB-TolC, the main efflux pump in
Escherichia coli, in regulating gene expression.
METHODS: Deletion mutants, an acrABp-lacZ fusion and reverse
transcription-real-time quantitative PCR experiments were used to study the role 
of AcrAB-TolC and metabolism in regulating gene expression of the acrAB operon
and its transcriptional regulators.
RESULTS: Deletion of the acrB gene increased the expression of the acrAB operon. 
A similar induction of acrAB was found when acrA or tolC was deleted, and when
the pump function was inhibited using phenylalanine-arginine-β-naphthylamide. The
induction of acrAB in the ΔacrB strain was totally (AcrR or SoxS) or partially
(SoxR or MarA) prevented when the genes for these acrAB regulators were also
deleted. The expression of soxS and marA, but not of acrR, was increased in the
ΔacrB strain, which also showed altered expression of many other genes related to
different cellular processes, including motility. Deletion of the metabolic genes
entA and entE (enterobactin biosysnthesis), glpX (gluconeogenesis), cysH
(cysteine biosynthesis) and purA (purine biosynthesis) also prevented activation 
of the acrAB promoter in the ΔacrB strain. Addition of the enterobactin
biosynthesis intermediate metabolite 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate induced the expression
of acrAB.
CONCLUSIONS: These results together suggest a model in which the AcrAB-TolC pump 
effluxes cellular metabolites that are toxic and/or have a signalling role. If
the pump is inactivated or inhibited, these metabolites would accumulate,
inactivating AcrR and/or up-regulating soxS and marA expression, ultimately
triggering the up-regulation of acrAB expression to restore homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkt352 
PMCID: PMC3886929
PMID: 24043404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (rpmI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jan 18;375(3):612-25. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

A competition mechanism regulates the translation of the Escherichia coli operon 
encoding ribosomal proteins L35 and L20.

Haentjens-Sitri J(1), Allemand F, Springer M, Chiaruttini C.

Author information: 
(1)UPR9073 du CNRS associée à l'Université de Paris VII, Institut de Biologie
Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein (r-protein) L20 is essential for the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunit and is also a translational regulator of its own
rpmI-rplT operon, encoding r-proteins L35 and L20 in that order. L20 directly
represses the translation of the first cistron and, through translational
coupling, that of its own gene. The translational operator of the operon is 450
nt in length and includes a long-range pseudoknot interaction between two RNA
sequences separated by 280 nt. L20 has the potential to bind both to this
pseudoknot and to an irregular hairpin, although only one site is occupied at a
time during regulation. This work shows that the rpmI-rplT operon is regulated by
competition between L20 and the ribosome for binding to mRNA in vitro and in
vivo. Detailed studies on the regulatory mechanisms of r-protein synthesis have
only been performed on the rpsO gene, regulated by r-protein S15, and on the
alpha operon, regulated by S4. Both are thought to be controlled by a trapping
mechanism, whereby the 30S ribosomal subunit, the mRNA, and the initiator tRNA
are blocked as a nonfunctional preternary complex. This alternative mode of
regulation of the rpmI-rplT operon raises the possibility that control is
kinetically and not thermodynamically limited in this case. We show that the
pseudoknot, which is known to be essential for L20 binding and regulation, also
enhances 30S binding to mRNA as if this structure is specifically recognised by
the ribosome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.10.058 
PMID: 18037435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1578-88. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Ribosomal protein L20 controls expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon
via a transcription attenuation mechanism.

Choonee N(1), Even S, Zig L, Putzer H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9073, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie
Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In contrast to Escherichia coli no molecular mechanism controlling the
biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins has been elucidated in Gram-positive
organisms. Here we show that the expression of the Bacillus subtilis
infC-rpmI-rplT operon encoding translation factor IF3 and the ribosomal proteins 
L35 and L20 is autoregulated by a complex transcription attenuation mechanism. It
implicates a 200-bp leader region upstream of infC which contains two conserved
regulatory elements, one of which can act as a transcription terminator. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches we show that expression of the operon is regulated
at the level of transcription elongation by a change in the structure of the
leader mRNA which depends upon the presence of ribosomal protein L20. L20 binds
to a phylogenetically conserved domain and provokes premature transcription
termination at the leader terminator. Footprint and toeprint experiments support 
a regulatory model involving molecular mimicry between the L20-binding sites on
23S rRNA and the mRNA. Our data suggest that Nomura's model of ribosomal protein 
biosynthesis based on autogenous control and molecular mimicry is also valid in
Gram-positive organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm011 
PMCID: PMC1865079
PMID: 17289755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1996 Apr 10;250(6):705-14.

Physiological effects of translation initiation factor IF3 and ribosomal protein 
L20 limitation in Escherichia coli.

Olsson CL(1), Graffe M, Springer M, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616, USA.

To investigate the physiological roles of translation initiation factor IF3 and
ribosomal protein L20 in Escherichia coli, the infC, rpmI and rpIT genes encoding
IF3, L35 and L20, respectively, were placed under the control of lac
promotor/operator sequences. Thus, their expression is dependent upon the amount 
of inducer isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG) in the medium. Lysogenic strains were
constructed with recombinant lambda phages that express either rpmI and rplT or
infC and prmI in trans, thereby allowing depletion of only IF3 or L20 at low IPTG
concentrations. At low cellular concentration of IF3, but not L20, decreases and 
the growth rate slows. Furthermore, ribosomes run off polysomes, indicating that 
IF3 functions during the initiation phase of protein synthesis in vivo. During
slow growth, the ratio of RNA to protein increases rather than decreases as
occurs with control strains, indicating that IF3 limitation disrupts feedback
inhibition of rRNA synthesis. As IF3 levels drop, expression from an
AUU-infC-lacZ fusion increases, whereas expression decreases from an
AUG-infC-lacZ fusion, thereby confirming the model of autogenous regulation of
infC. The effects of L20 limitation are similar; cells grown in low
concentrations of IPTG exhibited a decrease in the rate of growth, a decrease in 
cellular L20 concentration, no change in IF3 concentration, and a small increase 
in the ratio of RNA to protein. In addition, a decrease in 50S subunits and the
appearance of an aberrant ribosome peak at approximately 41-43S is seen. Previous
studies have shown that the L20 protein negatively controls its own gene
expression. Reduction of the cellular concentration of L20 derepresses the
expression of an rplT-lacZ gene fusion, thus confirming autogenous regulation by 
L20.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02172982 
PMID: 8628231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Microbiol. 1995 May;30(5):313-6.

Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in Buchnera aphidicola (endosymbiont of aphids):
cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment containing aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT.

Kolibachuk D(1), Rouhbakhsh D, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis 95616-8665, USA.

A 4.5-kilobase DNA fragment from Buchnera aphidicola, the endosymbiont of the
aphid Schizaphis graminum, was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of homology to 
Escherichia coli, the following genes were found in the order listed:
aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT. AroH corresponds to the E. coli tryptophan-inhibited
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase. Evidence was
presented indicating that this is the sole gene for DAHP synthase in the B.
aphidicola genome. This enzyme initiates the complex branched pathway leading to 
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. The presence of aroH is consistent with past
observations indicating that aphid endosymbionts are able to synthesize
tryptophan for the aphid host. thrS, infC, rpmI, and rplT correspond to genes for
threonine tRNA synthase, initiation factor-3, and large ribosome subunit proteins
L35 and L20, respectively. Sequence comparisons indicate some differences and
similarities between E. coli and B. aphidicola with respect to the possible
regulation of synthesis of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00295507 
PMID: 7766160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 1993 May 15;127(1):79-85.

Identification of a putative infC-rpmI-rplT operon flanked by long inverted
repeats in Mycoplasma fermentans (incognitus strain).

Hu WS(1), Wang RY, Shih JW, Lo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases Pathology, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000.

A specific 1542-bp DNA fragment was amplified from Mycoplasma fermentans
(incognitus strain) using a unique 23-nucleotide (nt) synthetic
deoxyribonucleotide (oligo) (5'-TCCAAAAAGTCCGGAATTTGGGG) as the primer pair in
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The 23-nt sequence is part of the 29-bp
terminal inverted repeat (IR) which forms the left potential stem-and-loop (s&l) 
structure of the previously identified M. fermentans insertion-sequence(IS)-like 
genetic element [Hu et al., Gene 93 (1990) 67-72]. The amplified DNA was cloned
and sequenced. A pair of 27-bp IR containing the 23-nt synthetic oligo was
identified at both termini. Between the IR, there are four potential open reading
frames (ORFs) which are arranged adjacent to each other in the order, ORF-1,
ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4, with parts of ORF-1 and ORF-2 overlapping. The deduced
amino acid (aa) sequences of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are 34 to 60% identical to
the translation initiation factor IF3 (encoded by the infC gene), ribosomal
proteins L35 (rpmI gene) and L20 (rplT gene) of Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, respectively. In bacteria, the infC-rpmI-rplT genes are
organized to function as an operon. There are multiple sites with promoter-like
sequences identified upstream from the putative infC gene in the mycoplasma
closely resembling the gene arrangement in the bacterial operon. All three genes 
of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are preceded individually by a strong appropriately
spaced (7 and 10 bp) putative Shine-Dalgarno sequence (5'-AAGGA).(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(93)90619-e 
PMID: 8486291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Biol. 1992 Nov 20;228(2):366-86.

Messenger RNA secondary structure and translational coupling in the Escherichia
coli operon encoding translation initiation factor IF3 and the ribosomal
proteins, L35 and L20.

Lesage P(1), Chiaruttini C, Graffe M, Dondon J, Milet M, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The Escherichia coli infC-rpmI-rplT operon encodes translation initiation factor 
IF3 and the ribosomal proteins, L35 and L20, respectively. The expression of the 
last cistron (rplT) has been shown to be negatively regulated at a
post-transcriptional level by its own product, L20, which acts at an internal
operator located within infC. The present work shows that L20 directly represses 
the expression of rpmI, and indirectly that of rplT, via translational coupling
with rpmI. Deletions and an inversion of the coding region of rpmI, suggest an
mRNA secondary structure forming between sequences within rpmI and the
translation initiation site of rplT. To verify the existence of this structure,
detailed analyses were performed using chemical and enzymatic probes. Also,
mutants that uncoupled rplT expression from that of rpmI, were isolated. The
mutations fall at positions that would base-pair in the secondary structure. Our 
model is that L20 binds to its operator within infC and represses the translation
of rpmI. When the rpmI mRNA is not translated, it can base-pair with the
ribosomal binding site of rplT, sequestering it, and abolishing rplT expression. 
If the rpmI mRNA is translated, i.e. covered by ribosomes, the inhibitory
structure cannot form leaving the translation initiation site of rplT free for
ribosomal binding and for full expression. Although translational coupling in
ribosomal protein operons has been suspected to be due to the formation of
secondary structures that sequester internal ribosomal binding sites, this is the
first time that such a structure has been shown to exist.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90827-7 
PMID: 1453449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 May;227(1):60-4.

In vivo transcriptional pattern in the infC operon of Bacillus
stearothermophilus.

Falconi M(1), Brombach M, Gualerzi CO, Pon CL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, University of Camerino, Italy.

By Northern blot and primer extension analyses it was shown that in Bacillus
stearothermophilus the genes infC, rpmI and rplT constitute a single
transcriptional unit; the promoter and the transcriptional start-point used in
vivo were identified and the half-life of the transcript (1.2 min) was
determined. No indication of multiple initiation sites nor of differential
stability of different regions of the transcript was found. The results suggest
that Escherichia coli and B. stearothermophilus have a different pattern of
transcription around the infC gene cluster and that differential translational
efficiency within the infC-rpmI-rplT transcriptional unit accounts for the
different levels of IF3, L35 and L20 expression. The rare AUU initiation codon is
the only strictly conserved element of the several peculiar transcriptional and
translational features found in E. coli infC. Upon changing this codon to AUG, we
found a ca. 30-fold increased expression of B. stearothermophilus infC, which is 
similar to that previously found with E. coli infC (i.e. 40-fold), and provided
evidence that regulation of infC expression through its rare AUU initiation codon
might be a general phenomenon in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00260707 
PMID: 2046659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Biol. 1990 Jun 5;213(3):465-75.

Translated translational operator in Escherichia coli. Auto-regulation in the
infC-rpmI-rplT operon.

Lesage P(1), Truong HN, Graffe M, Dondon J, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The genes coding for translation initiation factor IF3 (infC) and for the
ribosomal proteins L35 (rpmI) and L20 (rplT) are transcribed in that order from a
promoter in front of infC. The last two cistrons of the operon (rpmI and rplT)
can be transcribed from a weak secondary promoter situated within the first
cistron (infC). Previous experiments have shown that the expression of infC, the 
first cistron of the operon, is negatively autoregulated at the translational
level and that the abnormal AUU initiation codon of infC is responsible for the
control. We show that the expression of the last cistron (rplT) is also
autoregulated at the posttranscriptional level. The L20 concentration regulates
the level of rplT expression by acting in trans at a site located within the
first cistron (infC) and thus different from that at which IF3 is known to act.
This regulatory site, several hundred nucleotides upstream from the target gene
(rplT), was identified through deletions, insertions and a point mutation. Thus, 
the expression of the operon is controlled in trans by the products of two
different cistrons acting at two different sites. The localization within an open
reading frame (infC) of a regulatory site acting in cis on the translation of a
downstream gene (rplT) is new and was unforeseen since ribosomes translating
through the regulatory site might be expected to impair either the binding of L20
or the mRNA secondary structure change caused by the binding. The possible
competition between translation of the regions acting in cis and the regulation
of the expression of the target gene is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80208-6 
PMID: 2191140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Aug;218(2):355-7.

Cloning and characterization of a gene cluster from Bacillus stearothermophilus
comprising infC, rpmI and rplT.

Pon CL(1), Brombach M, Thamm S, Gualerzi CO.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt. Wittmann, Berlin.

Using two synthetic deoxyribonucleotide probes encoding segments of the primary
structure of initiation factor IF3 from Bacillus stearothermophilus, we
identified and cloned a segment of DNA which carries the infC gene. As in
Escherichia coli, the infC gene begins with the unusual initiation triplet AUU,
and is followed by the structural genes for ribosomal proteins L35 and L20 (rpmI 
and rplT, respectively).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00331290 
PMID: 2779520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biochem. 1987 Mar;101(3):817-20.

Primary structures of and genes for new ribosomal proteins A and B in Escherichia
coli.

Wada A, Sako T.

We determined the partial primary structures of and identified the genes for new 
basic proteins A and B in Escherichia coli ribosomal 50S subunits, found by means
of an improved two-dimensional gel electrophoresis method. The sequence up to the
17th amino acid of protein B was in agreement with that of the X gene in the spc 
operon. The gene for protein A was searched for in the GenBank data base using
the sequence up to the 35th amino acid, and was found at a locus between infC and
rplT. The base sequence indicated that protein A contained 64 amino acids and had
a molecular weight of 6,984. We conclude that proteins A and B are intrinsic
ribosomal proteins, and propose calling their genes, rpmI and rpmJ, respectively.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/101.3.817 
PMID: 3298224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (infC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1578-88. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Ribosomal protein L20 controls expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon
via a transcription attenuation mechanism.

Choonee N(1), Even S, Zig L, Putzer H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9073, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, 13 rue Pierre et Marie
Curie, 75005 Paris, France.

In contrast to Escherichia coli no molecular mechanism controlling the
biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins has been elucidated in Gram-positive
organisms. Here we show that the expression of the Bacillus subtilis
infC-rpmI-rplT operon encoding translation factor IF3 and the ribosomal proteins 
L35 and L20 is autoregulated by a complex transcription attenuation mechanism. It
implicates a 200-bp leader region upstream of infC which contains two conserved
regulatory elements, one of which can act as a transcription terminator. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches we show that expression of the operon is regulated
at the level of transcription elongation by a change in the structure of the
leader mRNA which depends upon the presence of ribosomal protein L20. L20 binds
to a phylogenetically conserved domain and provokes premature transcription
termination at the leader terminator. Footprint and toeprint experiments support 
a regulatory model involving molecular mimicry between the L20-binding sites on
23S rRNA and the mRNA. Our data suggest that Nomura's model of ribosomal protein 
biosynthesis based on autogenous control and molecular mimicry is also valid in
Gram-positive organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm011 
PMCID: PMC1865079
PMID: 17289755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Gen Genet. 1996 Apr 10;250(6):705-14.

Physiological effects of translation initiation factor IF3 and ribosomal protein 
L20 limitation in Escherichia coli.

Olsson CL(1), Graffe M, Springer M, Hershey JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis 95616, USA.

To investigate the physiological roles of translation initiation factor IF3 and
ribosomal protein L20 in Escherichia coli, the infC, rpmI and rpIT genes encoding
IF3, L35 and L20, respectively, were placed under the control of lac
promotor/operator sequences. Thus, their expression is dependent upon the amount 
of inducer isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG) in the medium. Lysogenic strains were
constructed with recombinant lambda phages that express either rpmI and rplT or
infC and prmI in trans, thereby allowing depletion of only IF3 or L20 at low IPTG
concentrations. At low cellular concentration of IF3, but not L20, decreases and 
the growth rate slows. Furthermore, ribosomes run off polysomes, indicating that 
IF3 functions during the initiation phase of protein synthesis in vivo. During
slow growth, the ratio of RNA to protein increases rather than decreases as
occurs with control strains, indicating that IF3 limitation disrupts feedback
inhibition of rRNA synthesis. As IF3 levels drop, expression from an
AUU-infC-lacZ fusion increases, whereas expression decreases from an
AUG-infC-lacZ fusion, thereby confirming the model of autogenous regulation of
infC. The effects of L20 limitation are similar; cells grown in low
concentrations of IPTG exhibited a decrease in the rate of growth, a decrease in 
cellular L20 concentration, no change in IF3 concentration, and a small increase 
in the ratio of RNA to protein. In addition, a decrease in 50S subunits and the
appearance of an aberrant ribosome peak at approximately 41-43S is seen. Previous
studies have shown that the L20 protein negatively controls its own gene
expression. Reduction of the cellular concentration of L20 derepresses the
expression of an rplT-lacZ gene fusion, thus confirming autogenous regulation by 
L20.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02172982 
PMID: 8628231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Curr Microbiol. 1995 May;30(5):313-6.

Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in Buchnera aphidicola (endosymbiont of aphids):
cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment containing aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT.

Kolibachuk D(1), Rouhbakhsh D, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis 95616-8665, USA.

A 4.5-kilobase DNA fragment from Buchnera aphidicola, the endosymbiont of the
aphid Schizaphis graminum, was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of homology to 
Escherichia coli, the following genes were found in the order listed:
aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT. AroH corresponds to the E. coli tryptophan-inhibited
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase. Evidence was
presented indicating that this is the sole gene for DAHP synthase in the B.
aphidicola genome. This enzyme initiates the complex branched pathway leading to 
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. The presence of aroH is consistent with past
observations indicating that aphid endosymbionts are able to synthesize
tryptophan for the aphid host. thrS, infC, rpmI, and rplT correspond to genes for
threonine tRNA synthase, initiation factor-3, and large ribosome subunit proteins
L35 and L20, respectively. Sequence comparisons indicate some differences and
similarities between E. coli and B. aphidicola with respect to the possible
regulation of synthesis of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00295507 
PMID: 7766160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1993 May 15;127(1):79-85.

Identification of a putative infC-rpmI-rplT operon flanked by long inverted
repeats in Mycoplasma fermentans (incognitus strain).

Hu WS(1), Wang RY, Shih JW, Lo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases Pathology, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC 20306-6000.

A specific 1542-bp DNA fragment was amplified from Mycoplasma fermentans
(incognitus strain) using a unique 23-nucleotide (nt) synthetic
deoxyribonucleotide (oligo) (5'-TCCAAAAAGTCCGGAATTTGGGG) as the primer pair in
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The 23-nt sequence is part of the 29-bp
terminal inverted repeat (IR) which forms the left potential stem-and-loop (s&l) 
structure of the previously identified M. fermentans insertion-sequence(IS)-like 
genetic element [Hu et al., Gene 93 (1990) 67-72]. The amplified DNA was cloned
and sequenced. A pair of 27-bp IR containing the 23-nt synthetic oligo was
identified at both termini. Between the IR, there are four potential open reading
frames (ORFs) which are arranged adjacent to each other in the order, ORF-1,
ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4, with parts of ORF-1 and ORF-2 overlapping. The deduced
amino acid (aa) sequences of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are 34 to 60% identical to
the translation initiation factor IF3 (encoded by the infC gene), ribosomal
proteins L35 (rpmI gene) and L20 (rplT gene) of Escherichia coli and Bacillus
stearothermophilus, respectively. In bacteria, the infC-rpmI-rplT genes are
organized to function as an operon. There are multiple sites with promoter-like
sequences identified upstream from the putative infC gene in the mycoplasma
closely resembling the gene arrangement in the bacterial operon. All three genes 
of ORF-2, ORF-3 and ORF-4 are preceded individually by a strong appropriately
spaced (7 and 10 bp) putative Shine-Dalgarno sequence (5'-AAGGA).(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(93)90619-e 
PMID: 8486291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Biol. 1992 Nov 20;228(2):366-86.

Messenger RNA secondary structure and translational coupling in the Escherichia
coli operon encoding translation initiation factor IF3 and the ribosomal
proteins, L35 and L20.

Lesage P(1), Chiaruttini C, Graffe M, Dondon J, Milet M, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The Escherichia coli infC-rpmI-rplT operon encodes translation initiation factor 
IF3 and the ribosomal proteins, L35 and L20, respectively. The expression of the 
last cistron (rplT) has been shown to be negatively regulated at a
post-transcriptional level by its own product, L20, which acts at an internal
operator located within infC. The present work shows that L20 directly represses 
the expression of rpmI, and indirectly that of rplT, via translational coupling
with rpmI. Deletions and an inversion of the coding region of rpmI, suggest an
mRNA secondary structure forming between sequences within rpmI and the
translation initiation site of rplT. To verify the existence of this structure,
detailed analyses were performed using chemical and enzymatic probes. Also,
mutants that uncoupled rplT expression from that of rpmI, were isolated. The
mutations fall at positions that would base-pair in the secondary structure. Our 
model is that L20 binds to its operator within infC and represses the translation
of rpmI. When the rpmI mRNA is not translated, it can base-pair with the
ribosomal binding site of rplT, sequestering it, and abolishing rplT expression. 
If the rpmI mRNA is translated, i.e. covered by ribosomes, the inhibitory
structure cannot form leaving the translation initiation site of rplT free for
ribosomal binding and for full expression. Although translational coupling in
ribosomal protein operons has been suspected to be due to the formation of
secondary structures that sequester internal ribosomal binding sites, this is the
first time that such a structure has been shown to exist.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90827-7 
PMID: 1453449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Gen Genet. 1991 May;227(1):60-4.

In vivo transcriptional pattern in the infC operon of Bacillus
stearothermophilus.

Falconi M(1), Brombach M, Gualerzi CO, Pon CL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, University of Camerino, Italy.

By Northern blot and primer extension analyses it was shown that in Bacillus
stearothermophilus the genes infC, rpmI and rplT constitute a single
transcriptional unit; the promoter and the transcriptional start-point used in
vivo were identified and the half-life of the transcript (1.2 min) was
determined. No indication of multiple initiation sites nor of differential
stability of different regions of the transcript was found. The results suggest
that Escherichia coli and B. stearothermophilus have a different pattern of
transcription around the infC gene cluster and that differential translational
efficiency within the infC-rpmI-rplT transcriptional unit accounts for the
different levels of IF3, L35 and L20 expression. The rare AUU initiation codon is
the only strictly conserved element of the several peculiar transcriptional and
translational features found in E. coli infC. Upon changing this codon to AUG, we
found a ca. 30-fold increased expression of B. stearothermophilus infC, which is 
similar to that previously found with E. coli infC (i.e. 40-fold), and provided
evidence that regulation of infC expression through its rare AUU initiation codon
might be a general phenomenon in bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00260707 
PMID: 2046659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Mol Biol. 1990 Jun 5;213(3):465-75.

Translated translational operator in Escherichia coli. Auto-regulation in the
infC-rpmI-rplT operon.

Lesage P(1), Truong HN, Graffe M, Dondon J, Springer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France.

The genes coding for translation initiation factor IF3 (infC) and for the
ribosomal proteins L35 (rpmI) and L20 (rplT) are transcribed in that order from a
promoter in front of infC. The last two cistrons of the operon (rpmI and rplT)
can be transcribed from a weak secondary promoter situated within the first
cistron (infC). Previous experiments have shown that the expression of infC, the 
first cistron of the operon, is negatively autoregulated at the translational
level and that the abnormal AUU initiation codon of infC is responsible for the
control. We show that the expression of the last cistron (rplT) is also
autoregulated at the posttranscriptional level. The L20 concentration regulates
the level of rplT expression by acting in trans at a site located within the
first cistron (infC) and thus different from that at which IF3 is known to act.
This regulatory site, several hundred nucleotides upstream from the target gene
(rplT), was identified through deletions, insertions and a point mutation. Thus, 
the expression of the operon is controlled in trans by the products of two
different cistrons acting at two different sites. The localization within an open
reading frame (infC) of a regulatory site acting in cis on the translation of a
downstream gene (rplT) is new and was unforeseen since ribosomes translating
through the regulatory site might be expected to impair either the binding of L20
or the mRNA secondary structure change caused by the binding. The possible
competition between translation of the regions acting in cis and the regulation
of the expression of the target gene is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80208-6 
PMID: 2191140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Aug;218(2):355-7.

Cloning and characterization of a gene cluster from Bacillus stearothermophilus
comprising infC, rpmI and rplT.

Pon CL(1), Brombach M, Thamm S, Gualerzi CO.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Abt. Wittmann, Berlin.

Using two synthetic deoxyribonucleotide probes encoding segments of the primary
structure of initiation factor IF3 from Bacillus stearothermophilus, we
identified and cloned a segment of DNA which carries the infC gene. As in
Escherichia coli, the infC gene begins with the unusual initiation triplet AUU,
and is followed by the structural genes for ribosomal proteins L35 and L20 (rpmI 
and rplT, respectively).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00331290 
PMID: 2779520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Gene. 1988 Mar 31;63(2):309-20.

Transcriptional patterns for the thrS-infC-rplT operon of Escherichia coli.

Wertheimer SJ(1), Klotsky RA, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

The genes coding for threonyl-tRNA synthetase (thrS), translation initiation
factor 3 (infC) and ribosomal protein L20 (rplT) are clustered in the Escherichia
coli genome. Previous studies had suggested the possibility that the expression
of these genes is coupled. The transcriptional events in this operon have now
been examined by S1 nuclease mapping and promoter fusion studies. The results
indicate that infC-containing mRNAs are initiated from three separate promoters. 
Two of these are located in the protein-coding region of thrS and one, P12, is
the major promoter at all growth rates tested. In addition, there is
co-transcription of thrS and infC from the thrS promoter (PT). A single promoter 
for thrS has been mapped approx. 170 nucleotides upstream from its translation
initiation site. Another promoter has been located within the infC-coding region.
It is separated from the next downstream gene, rplT, by a transcription end
point. However, termination at this region is only 50-70% efficient and
transcripts starting at this promoter can read through into rplT. These findings 
demonstrate that the pattern of transcription in this operon is highly complex
and the mRNA levels for each of the genes is determined by a variety of factors, 
including multiple promoters, co-transcription and readthrough of transcription
termination signals.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90534-3 
PMID: 2838394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Jun;208(1-2):94-100.

The unusual translational initiation codon AUU limits the expression of the infC 
(initiation factor IF3) gene of Escherichia coli.

Brombach M, Pon CL.

The expression of infC, the structural gene for translational initiation factor
IF3, has been studied in different constructs under the control of the lambda PL 
and tac promoters. The amount of synthesized IF3 has been determined by a
quantitative functional test and the levels of IF3-specific mRNA have been
estimated. The synthesis of IF3 is strongly enhanced when the unusual AUU
initiation codon is changed to AUG by site-directed mutagenesis. Removal of the
sequence upstream from the start codon including most of the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence, as well as part of a 10 bp region with potential complementarity to an 
internal region of the 16S rRNA, which is unique to the IF3 mRNA, reduced but did
not completely abolish the high expression of infC obtained after introduction of
the AUG initiation codon. The level of IF3 mRNA was found to be positively
influenced by the presence of the rplT gene in the plasmid downstream from the
infC gene. In vivo accumulation of a large excess of IF3, obtained when the infC 
gene was placed under the control of an incompletely repressed tac promoter, was 
not accompanied by any noticeable adverse phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00330428 
PMID: 3302616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplT) AND (thrS)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Curr Microbiol. 1995 May;30(5):313-6.

Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in Buchnera aphidicola (endosymbiont of aphids):
cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment containing aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT.

Kolibachuk D(1), Rouhbakhsh D, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis 95616-8665, USA.

A 4.5-kilobase DNA fragment from Buchnera aphidicola, the endosymbiont of the
aphid Schizaphis graminum, was cloned and sequenced. On the basis of homology to 
Escherichia coli, the following genes were found in the order listed:
aroH-thrS-infC-rpmI-rplT. AroH corresponds to the E. coli tryptophan-inhibited
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase. Evidence was
presented indicating that this is the sole gene for DAHP synthase in the B.
aphidicola genome. This enzyme initiates the complex branched pathway leading to 
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. The presence of aroH is consistent with past
observations indicating that aphid endosymbionts are able to synthesize
tryptophan for the aphid host. thrS, infC, rpmI, and rplT correspond to genes for
threonine tRNA synthase, initiation factor-3, and large ribosome subunit proteins
L35 and L20, respectively. Sequence comparisons indicate some differences and
similarities between E. coli and B. aphidicola with respect to the possible
regulation of synthesis of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00295507 
PMID: 7766160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 1988 Mar 31;63(2):309-20.

Transcriptional patterns for the thrS-infC-rplT operon of Escherichia coli.

Wertheimer SJ(1), Klotsky RA, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

The genes coding for threonyl-tRNA synthetase (thrS), translation initiation
factor 3 (infC) and ribosomal protein L20 (rplT) are clustered in the Escherichia
coli genome. Previous studies had suggested the possibility that the expression
of these genes is coupled. The transcriptional events in this operon have now
been examined by S1 nuclease mapping and promoter fusion studies. The results
indicate that infC-containing mRNAs are initiated from three separate promoters. 
Two of these are located in the protein-coding region of thrS and one, P12, is
the major promoter at all growth rates tested. In addition, there is
co-transcription of thrS and infC from the thrS promoter (PT). A single promoter 
for thrS has been mapped approx. 170 nucleotides upstream from its translation
initiation site. Another promoter has been located within the infC-coding region.
It is separated from the next downstream gene, rplT, by a transcription end
point. However, termination at this region is only 50-70% efficient and
transcripts starting at this promoter can read through into rplT. These findings 
demonstrate that the pattern of transcription in this operon is highly complex
and the mRNA levels for each of the genes is determined by a variety of factors, 
including multiple promoters, co-transcription and readthrough of transcription
termination signals.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90534-3 
PMID: 2838394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((uvrY) AND (csrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mBio. 2022 Feb 1:e0381421. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03814-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Two Polyketides Intertwined in Complex Regulation: Posttranscriptional
CsrA-Mediated Control of Colibactin and Yersiniabactin Synthesis in Escherichia
coli.

Rehm N(1)(2), Wallenstein A(1), Keizers M(1), Homburg S(3), Magistro G(4),
Chagneau CV(5), Klimek H(1), Revelles O(6), Helloin E(5)(7), Putze J(1)(3),
Nougayrède JP(5), Schubert S(8), Oswald E(5), Dobrindt U(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Hygiene, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Interdisziplinäres Zentrum für Klinische Forschung (IZKF) Münster, Universität
Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institut für Molekulare Infektionsbiologie, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.
(4)Urologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Munich, Germany.
(5)IRSD, Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(6)LISBP, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRA, INSA, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(7)ISP, INRA, Université de Tours, UMR 1282, Nouzilly, France.
(8)Max von Pettenkofer-Institut für Hygiene und Medizinische Mikrobiologie,
Medizinische Fakultät, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Bacteria have to process several levels of gene regulation and coordination of
interconnected regulatory networks to ensure the most adequate cellular response 
to specific growth conditions. Especially, expression of complex and costly
fitness and pathogenicity-associated traits is coordinated and tightly regulated 
at multiple levels. We studied the interconnected regulation of the expression of
the colibactin and yersiniabactin polyketide biosynthesis machineries, which are 
encoded by two pathogenicity islands found in many phylogroup B2 Escherichia coli
isolates. Comparative phenotypic and genotypic analyses identified the BarA-UvrY 
two-component system as an important regulatory element involved in colibactin
and yersiniabactin expression. The carbon storage regulator (Csr) system controls
the expression of a wide range of central metabolic and virulence-associated
traits. The availability of CsrA, the key translational regulator of the Csr
system, depends on BarA-UvrY activity. We employed reporter gene fusions to
demonstrate UvrY- and CsrA-dependent expression of the colibactin and
yersiniabactin determinants and confirmed a direct interaction of CsrA with the
5' untranslated leader transcripts of representative genes of the colibactin and 
yersiniabactin operons by RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays. This
posttranscriptional regulation adds an additional level of complexity to control 
mechanisms of polyketide expression, which is also orchestrated at the level of
ferric uptake regulator (Fur)-dependent regulation of transcription and
phosphopantetheinyl transferase-dependent activation of polyketide biosynthesis. 
Our results emphasize the interconnection of iron- and primary
metabolism-responsive regulation of colibactin and yersiniabactin expression by
the fine-tuned action of different regulatory mechanisms in response to variable 
environmental signals as a prerequisite for bacterial adaptability, fitness, and 
pathogenicity in different habitats. IMPORTANCE Secondary metabolite expression
is a widespread strategy among bacteria to improve their fitness in habitats
where they constantly compete for resources with other bacteria. The production
of secondary metabolites is associated with a metabolic and energetic burden.
Colibactin and yersiniabactin are two polyketides, which are expressed in concert
and promote the virulence of different enterobacterial pathogens. To maximize
fitness, they should be expressed only in microenvironments in which they are
required. Accordingly, precise regulation of colibactin and yersiniabactin
expression is crucial. We show that the expression of these two polyketides is
also interconnected via primary metabolism-responsive regulation at the
posttranscriptional level by the CsrA RNA-binding protein. Our findings may help 
to optimize (over-)expression and further functional characterization of the
polyketide colibactin. Additionally, this new aspect of concerted colibactin and 
yersiniabactin expression extends our knowledge of conditions that favor the
expression of these virulence- and fitness-associated factors in different
Enterobacterales members.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03814-21 
PMCID: PMC8805033
PMID: 35100864 


2. J Biol Chem. 2021 Dec;297(6):101383. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101383. Epub 2021
Nov 4.

The Escherichia coli two-component signal sensor BarA binds protonated acetate
via a conserved hydrophobic-binding pocket.

Alvarez AF(1), Rodríguez C(1), González-Chávez R(1), Georgellis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City, México.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City, México. Electronic address:
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The BarA/UvrY two-component signal transduction system is widely conserved in
γ-proteobacteria and provides a link between the metabolic state of the cells and
the Csr posttranscriptional regulatory system. In Escherichia coli, the BarA/UvrY
system responds to the presence of acetate and other short-chain carboxylic acids
by activating transcription of the noncoding RNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester
the RNA-binding protein CsrA, a global regulator of gene expression. However, the
state of the carboxyl group in the acetate molecule, which serves as the BarA
stimulus, and the signal reception site of BarA remain unknown. In this study, we
show that the deletion or replacement of the periplasmic domain of BarA and also 
the substitution of certain hydroxylated and hydrophobic amino acid residues in
this region, result in a sensor kinase that remains unresponsive to its
physiological stimulus, demonstrating that the periplasmic region of BarA
constitutes a functional detector domain. Moreover, we provide evidence that the 
protonated state of acetate or formate serves as the physiological stimulus of
BarA. In addition, modeling of the BarA sensor domain and prediction of the
signal-binding site, by blind molecular docking, revealed a calcium channels and 
chemotaxis receptors domain with a conserved binding pocket, which comprised
uncharged polar and hydrophobic amino acid residues. Based on the comparative
sequence and phylogenetic analyses, we propose that, at least, two types of BarA 
orthologues diverged and evolved separately to acquire distinct signal-binding
properties, illustrating the wide adaptability of the bacterial sensor kinase
proteins.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101383 
PMCID: PMC8639471
PMID: 34743001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


3. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 27;13(12):e0209554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554.
eCollection 2018.

Regulatory loop between the CsrA system and NhaR, a high salt/high pH regulator.

Król JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

In E. coli, under high pH/high salt conditions, a major Na+/H+ antiporter (NhaA) 
is activated to maintain an internal pH level. Its expression is induced by a
specific regulator NhaR, which is also responsible for osmC and pgaA regulation. 
Here I report that the NhaR regulator affects the carbon storage regulatory Csr
system. I found that the expression of all major components of the Csr
system-CsrA regulator, CsrB and CsrC small RNAs, and the CsrB and CsrC stability 
were indirectly affected by nhaR mutation under stress conditions. Using a
combination of experimental and in silico analyses, I concluded that the
mechanism of regulation included direct and indirect activation of a
two-component system (TCS) response regulator-UvrY. NhaR regulation involved
interactions with the regulators H-NS and SdiA and was affected by a naturally
occurring spontaneous IS5 insertion in the promoter region. A regulatory circuit 
was proposed and discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209554 
PMCID: PMC6307784
PMID: 30589862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


4. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jun 29;17(7). pii: E979. doi: 10.3390/ijms17070979.

Subinhibitory Concentrations of Allicin Decrease Uropathogenic Escherichia coli
(UPEC) Biofilm Formation, Adhesion Ability, and Swimming Motility.

Yang X(1), Sha K(2), Xu G(3), Tian H(4), Wang X(5), Chen S(6), Wang Y(7), Li
J(8), Chen J(9), Huang N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. fantasyyxl@sina.com.
(2)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. shakaihui@scu.edu.cn.
(3)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. xuguangya@scu.edu.cn.
(4)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. tianhanwen@scu.edu.cn.
(5)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wangxiaoying@scu.edu.cn.
(6)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenshanze@scu.edu.cn.
(7)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. wy4504228@163.com.
(8)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. jingyuli@scu.edu.cn.
(9)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. chenjunlinsf@163.com.
(10)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, Department of Pathophysiology, West 
China School of Preclinical &amp; Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610000, Sichuan, China. huangpanxiao222@sina.com.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) biofilm formation enables the organism to
avoid the host immune system, resist antibiotics, and provide a reservoir for
persistent infection. Once the biofilm is established, eradication of the
infection becomes difficult. Therefore, strategies against UPEC biofilm are
urgently required. In this study, we investigated the effect of allicin, isolated
from garlic essential oil, on UPEC CFT073 and J96 biofilm formation and
dispersal, along with its effect on UPEC adhesion ability and swimming motility. 
Sub-inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of allicin decreased UPEC biofilm
formation and affected its architecture. Allicin was also capable of dispersing
biofilm. Furthermore, allicin decreased the bacterial adhesion ability and
swimming motility, which are important for biofilm formation. Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) revealed that allicin decreased 
the expression of UPEC type 1 fimbriae adhesin gene fimH. Docking studies
suggested that allicin was located within the binding pocket of heptyl
α-d-mannopyrannoside in FimH and formed hydrogen bonds with Phe1 and Asn135. In
addition, allicin decreased the expression of the two-component regulatory
systems (TCSs) cognate response regulator gene uvrY and increased the expression 
of the RNA binding global regulatory protein gene csrA of UPEC CFT073, which is
associated with UPEC biofilm. The findings suggest that sub-MICs of allicin are
capable of affecting UPEC biofilm formation and dispersal, and decreasing UPEC
adhesion ability and swimming motility.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17070979 
PMCID: PMC4964365
PMID: 27367677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 30;11(6):e0157532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532.
eCollection 2016.

Integration of AI-2 Based Cell-Cell Signaling with Metabolic Cues in Escherichia 
coli.

Mitra A(1), Herren CD(1), Patel IR(1), Coleman A(1), Mukhopadhyay S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

The quorum sensing molecule Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) is generated as a byproduct of
activated methyl cycle by the action of LuxS in Escherichia coli. AI-2 is
synthesized, released and later internalized in a cell-density dependent manner. 
Here, by mutational analysis of the genes, uvrY and csrA, we describe a
regulatory circuit of accumulation and uptake of AI-2. We constructed a
single-copy chromosomal luxS-lacZ fusion in a luxS + merodiploid strain and
evaluated its relative expression in uvrY and csrA mutants. At the entry of
stationary phase, the expression of the fusion and AI-2 accumulation was
positively regulated by uvrY and negatively regulated by csrA respectively. A
deletion of csrA altered message stability of the luxS transcript and CsrA
protein exhibited weak binding to 5' luxS regulatory region. DNA protein
interaction and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed direct
interaction of UvrY with the luxS promoter. Additionally, reduced expression of
the fusion in hfq deletion mutant suggested involvement of small RNA interactions
in luxS regulation. In contrast, the expression of lsrA operon involved in AI-2
uptake, is negatively regulated by uvrY and positively by csrA in a cell-density 
dependent manner. The dual role of csrA in AI-2 synthesis and uptake suggested a 
regulatory crosstalk of cell signaling with carbon regulation in Escherichia
coli. We found that the cAMP-CRP mediated catabolite repression of luxS
expression was uvrY dependent. This study suggests that luxS expression is
complex and regulated at the level of transcription and translation. The
multifactorial regulation supports the notion that cell-cell communication
requires interaction and integration of multiple metabolic signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157532 
PMCID: PMC4928848
PMID: 27362507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2015 Mar;197(5):983-91. doi: 10.1128/JB.02325-14. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Effects of the global regulator CsrA on the BarA/UvrY two-component signaling
system.

Camacho MI(1), Alvarez AF(1), Chavez RG(1), Romeo T(2), Merino E(3), Georgellis
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The hybrid sensor kinase BarA and its cognate response regulator UvrY, members of
the two-component signal transduction family, activate transcription of CsrB and 
CsrC noncoding RNAs. These two small RNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding
protein CsrA, which posttranscriptionally regulates translation and/or stability 
of its target mRNAs. Here, we provide evidence that CsrA positively affects,
although indirectly, uvrY expression, at both the transcriptional and
translational levels. We also demonstrate that CsrA is required for properly
switching BarA from its phosphatase to its kinase activity. Thus, the existence
of a feedback loop mechanism that involves the Csr and BarA/UvrY global
regulatory systems is exposed.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02325-14 
PMCID: PMC4325108
PMID: 25535275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Jun;92(5):945-58. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12606. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Global effects of the DEAD-box RNA helicase DeaD (CsdA) on gene expression over a
broad range of temperatures.

Vakulskas CA(1), Pannuri A, Cortés-Selva D, Zere TR, Ahmer BM, Babitzke P, Romeo 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.

In Escherichia coli, activity of the global regulatory RNA binding protein CsrA
is antagonized by two non-coding sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester it away
from its lower affinity mRNA targets. Transcription of csrB/C requires the
BarA-UvrY two component signal transduction system, which responds to short chain
carboxylates. We show that two DEAD-box RNA helicases, DeaD and SrmB, activate
csrB/C expression by different pathways. DeaD facilitates uvrY translation by
counteracting the inhibitory effect of long distance base-pairing between the
uvrY mRNA leader and coding region, while SrmB does not affect UvrY or
UvrY-phosphate levels. Contrary to the prevailing notion that these helicases act
primarily at low temperatures, DeaD and SrmB activated csrB expression over a
wide temperature range. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by
cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) revealed in vivo interactions of
DeaD with 39 mRNAs, including those of uvrY and 9 other regulatory genes. Studies
on the expression of several of the identified genes revealed regulatory effects 
of DeaD in all cases and diverse temperature response patterns. Our findings
uncover an expanded regulatory role for DeaD, which is mediated through novel
mRNA targets, important global regulators and under physiological conditions that
were considered to be incompatible with its function.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12606 
PMCID: PMC4048959
PMID: 24708042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055492. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Pleiotropic roles of uvrY on biofilm formation, motility and virulence in
uropathogenic Escherichia coli CFT073.

Mitra A(1), Palaniyandi S, Herren CD, Zhu X, Mukhopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

Urinary tract infections primarily caused by uropathogenic strains of Escherichia
coli (E. coli) remain a significant public health problem in both developed and
developing countries. An important virulence determinant in uropathogenesis is
biofilm formation which requires expression of fimbriae, flagella, and other
surface components such as lipopolysaccharides. In this study, we explored the
regulation of uvrY and csrA genes in biofilm formation, motility and virulence
determinants in uropathogenic E. coli. We found that mutation in uvrY suppressed 
biofilm formation on abiotic surfaces such as polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene and
glass, and complementation of uvrY in the mutant restored the biofilm phenotype. 
We further evaluated the role of uvrY gene in expression of type 1 fimbriae, an
important adhesin that facilitates adhesion to various abiotic surfaces. We found
that phase variation of type 1 fimbriae between fimbriated and afimbriated mode
was modulated by uvrY at its transcriptional level. Deletion mutant of uvrY
lowered expression of fimbrial recombinase genes, such as fimB, fimE, and fimA, a
gene encoding major fimbrial subunit. Furthermore, transcription of virulence
specific genes such as papA, hlyB and galU was also reduced in the deletion
mutant. Swarming motility and expression of flhD and flhC was also diminished in 
the mutant. Taken together, our findings unravel a possible mechanism in which
uvrY facilitates biofilm formation, persistence and virulence of uropathogenic E.
coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055492 
PMCID: PMC3562240
PMID: 23383333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((sdiA) AND (ddlB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(7):2265-72.

Global impact of sdiA amplification revealed by comprehensive gene expression
profiling of Escherichia coli.

Wei Y(1), Lee JM, Smulski DR, LaRossa RA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, DuPont Company, Wilmington, Delaware
19880-0173, USA.

In Escherichia coli the amplification of sdiA, a positive activator of ftsQAZ,
genes that are essential for septation, results in mitomycin C resistance. To
help us understand this resistance phenotype, genes whose expression was altered 
by increased sdiA dosage were identified using a DNA microarray-based,
comprehensive transcript profiling method. The expression of 62 genes was reduced
by more than threefold; of these, 41 are involved in motility and chemotaxis.
Moreover, the expression of 75 genes, 36 of which had been previously
characterized, was elevated at least threefold. As expected, increased sdiA
dosage led to significantly elevated sdiA and 'ddlB-ftsQAZ-lpxC operon
expression. Transcription of two genes, uvrY and uvrC, located downstream of sdiA
and oriented in the same direction, was elevated about 10-fold, although the
intervening gene, yecF, of opposite polarity was unaffected by increased sdiA
dosage. Three genes (mioC and gidAB) flanking the replication origin, oriC, were 
transcribed more often when sdiA dosage was high, as were 12 genes within 1 min
of a terminus of replication, terB. Transcription of the acrABDEF genes, mapping 
in three widely spaced loci, was elevated significantly, while several genes
involved in DNA repair and replication (e.g., nei, recN, mioC, and mcrC) were
moderately elevated in expression. Such global analysis provides a link between
septation and the response to DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.7.2265-2272.2001 
PMCID: PMC95133
PMID: 11244066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((sdiA) AND (lpxC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Apr;183(7):2265-72.

Global impact of sdiA amplification revealed by comprehensive gene expression
profiling of Escherichia coli.

Wei Y(1), Lee JM, Smulski DR, LaRossa RA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, DuPont Company, Wilmington, Delaware
19880-0173, USA.

In Escherichia coli the amplification of sdiA, a positive activator of ftsQAZ,
genes that are essential for septation, results in mitomycin C resistance. To
help us understand this resistance phenotype, genes whose expression was altered 
by increased sdiA dosage were identified using a DNA microarray-based,
comprehensive transcript profiling method. The expression of 62 genes was reduced
by more than threefold; of these, 41 are involved in motility and chemotaxis.
Moreover, the expression of 75 genes, 36 of which had been previously
characterized, was elevated at least threefold. As expected, increased sdiA
dosage led to significantly elevated sdiA and 'ddlB-ftsQAZ-lpxC operon
expression. Transcription of two genes, uvrY and uvrC, located downstream of sdiA
and oriented in the same direction, was elevated about 10-fold, although the
intervening gene, yecF, of opposite polarity was unaffected by increased sdiA
dosage. Three genes (mioC and gidAB) flanking the replication origin, oriC, were 
transcribed more often when sdiA dosage was high, as were 12 genes within 1 min
of a terminus of replication, terB. Transcription of the acrABDEF genes, mapping 
in three widely spaced loci, was elevated significantly, while several genes
involved in DNA repair and replication (e.g., nei, recN, mioC, and mcrC) were
moderately elevated in expression. Such global analysis provides a link between
septation and the response to DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.7.2265-2272.2001 
PMCID: PMC95133
PMID: 11244066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nac) AND (csiR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2017 Jan 6;11(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12918-016-0376-y.

Coordinated regulation of acid resistance in Escherichia coli.

Aquino P(1)(2), Honda B(1), Jaini S(1), Lyubetskaya A(3), Hosur K(1)(2), Chiu
JG(2), Ekladious I(2), Hu D(2), Jin L(2), Sayeg MK(2), Stettner AI(2), Wang J(2),
Wong BG(2), Wong WS(2), Alexander SL(2), Ba C(2), Bensussen SI(2), Bernstein
DB(2), Braff D(2), Cha S(2), Cheng DI(2), Cho JH(2), Chou K(2), Chuang J(2),
Gastler DE(2), Grasso DJ(2), Greifenberger JS(2), Guo C(2), Hawes AK(2), Israni
DV(2), Jain SR(2), Kim J(2), Lei J(2), Li H(2), Li D(2), Li Q(2), Mancuso CP(2), 
Mao N(2), Masud SF(2), Meisel CL(2), Mi J(2), Nykyforchyn CS(2), Park M(2),
Peterson HM(2), Ramirez AK(2), Reynolds DS(2), Rim NG(2), Saffie JC(2), Su H(2), 
Su WR(2), Su Y(2), Sun M(2), Thommes MM(2), Tu T(2), Varongchayakul N(2), Wagner 
TE(2), Weinberg BH(2), Yang R(2), Yaroslavsky A(2), Yoon C(2), Zhao Y(2),
Zollinger AJ(2), Stringer AM(4), Foster JW(5), Wade J(4)(6), Raman S(5), Broude
N(1), Wong WW(1), Galagan JE(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(2)BE605 Course, Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics program, Boston University, Boston, USA.
(4)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of South Alabama College
of Medicine, Mobile, AL, 36688, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University at Albany, Albany, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, USA.
jgalag@bu.edu.
(8)Bioinformatics program, Boston University, Boston, USA. jgalag@bu.edu.
(9)National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Boston University, Boston,
USA. jgalag@bu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Enteric Escherichia coli survives the highly acidic environment of
the stomach through multiple acid resistance (AR) mechanisms. The most effective 
system, AR2, decarboxylates externally-derived glutamate to remove cytoplasmic
protons and excrete GABA. The first described system, AR1, does not require an
external amino acid. Its mechanism has not been determined. The regulation of the
multiple AR systems and their coordination with broader cellular metabolism has
not been fully explored.
RESULTS: We utilized a combination of ChIP-Seq and gene expression analysis to
experimentally map the regulatory interactions of four TFs: nac, ntrC, ompR, and 
csiR. Our data identified all previously in vivo confirmed direct interactions
and revealed several others previously inferred from gene expression data. Our
data demonstrate that nac and csiR directly modulate AR, and leads to a
regulatory network model in which all four TFs participate in coordinating acid
resistance, glutamate metabolism, and nitrogen metabolism. This model predicts a 
novel mechanism for AR1 by which the decarboxylation enzymes of AR2 are used with
internally derived glutamate. This hypothesis makes several testable predictions 
that we confirmed experimentally.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the regulatory network underlying AR is
complex and deeply interconnected with the regulation of GABA and glutamate
metabolism, nitrogen metabolism. These connections underlie and experimentally
validated model of AR1 in which the decarboxylation enzymes of AR2 are used with 
internally derived glutamate.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-016-0376-y 
PMCID: PMC5217608
PMID: 28061857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Feb;51(3):799-811.

Multiple stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex sigma
S-dependent csiD-ygaF-gabDTP operon in Escherichia coli.

Metzner M(1), Germer J, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The csiD-ygaF-gabDTP region in the Escherichia coli genome represents a cluster
of sigma S-controlled genes. Here, we investigated promoter structures, sigma
factor dependencies, potential co-regulation and environmental regulatory
patterns for all of these genes. We find that this region constitutes a complex
operon with expression being controlled by three differentially regulated
promoters: (i) csiDp, which affects the expression of all five genes, is
cAMP-CRP/sigma S-dependent and activated exclusively upon carbon starvation and
stationary phase; (ii) gabDp1, which is sigma S-dependent and exhibits multiple
stress induction like sigma S itself; and (iii) gabDp2[previously suggested by
Schneider, B.L., Ruback, S., Kiupakis, A.K., Kasbarian, H., Pybus, C., and
Reitzer, L. (2002) J. Bacteriol. 184: 6976-6986], which appears to be Nac/sigma
70-controlled and to respond to poor nitrogen sources. In addition, we identify a
novel repressor, CsiR, which modulates csiDp activity in a temporal manner during
early stationary phase. Finally, we propose a physiological role for sigma
S-controlled GabT/D-mediated gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) catabolism and glutamate 
accumulation in general stress adaptation. This physiological role is reflected
by the activation of the operon-internal gabDp1 promoter under the different
conditions that also induce sigma S, which include shifts to acidic pH or high
osmolarity as well as starvation or stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03867.x 
PMID: 14731280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcnR) AND (frmA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcnR) AND (frmR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):13639-13653. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096.
Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Ni(II) Sensing by RcnR Does Not Require an FrmR-Like Intersubunit Linkage.

Huang HT, Maroney MJ.

E. coli RcnR (resistance to cobalt and nickel regulator) is a homotetrameric DNA 
binding protein that regulates the expression of a Ni(II) and Co(II) exporter
(RcnAB) by derepressing expression of rcnA and rcnB in response to binding Co(II)
or Ni(II). Prior studies have shown that the cognate metal ions, Ni(II) and
Co(II), bind in six-coordinate sites at subunit interfaces and are distinguished 
from noncognate metals (Cu(I), Cu(II), and Zn(II)) by coordination number and
ligand selection. In analogy with FrmR, a formaldehyde-responsive transcriptional
regulator in the RcnR/CsoR family, the interfacial site allows the metal ions to 
"cross-link" the N-terminal domain of one subunit with the invariant Cys35
residue in another, which has been deemed to be key to mediating the allosteric
response of the tetrameric protein to metal binding. Through the use of
mutagenesis to disconnect one subunit from the metal-mediated cross-link, X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) as a structural probe, LacZ reporter assays, and
metal binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), the work
presented here shows that neither the interfacial binding site nor the
coordination number of Ni(II) is important to the allosteric response to binding 
of this cognate metal ion. The opposite is found for the other cognate metal ion,
Co(II), with respect to the interfacial binding site, suggesting that the
molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation by the two ions are distinct.
The metal binding studies reveal that tight metal binding is maintained in the
variant. XAS is further used to demonstrate that His33 is not a ligand for
Co(II), Ni(II), or Zn(II) in WT-RcnR. The results are discussed in the context of
the overall understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metallosensors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01096 
PMID: 31247878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 9;291(37):19502-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

The Effectors and Sensory Sites of Formaldehyde-responsive Regulator FrmR and
Metal-sensing Variant.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Sayer LN(3), Usón I(4), Huggins TG(2),
Robinson NJ(5), Pohl E(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040.
(3)From the Department of Chemistry.
(4)the Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona
Science Park, 08028 Barcelona, Spain, and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Department of Chemistry, School of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

The DUF156 family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators includes metal
sensors that respond to cobalt and/or nickel (RcnR, InrS) or copper (CsoR) plus
CstR, which responds to persulfide, and formaldehyde-responsive FrmR.
Unexpectedly, the allosteric mechanism of FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium is triggered by metals in vitro, and variant FrmR(E64H) gains
responsiveness to Zn(II) and cobalt in vivo Here we establish that the allosteric
mechanism of FrmR is triggered directly by formaldehyde in vitro Sensitivity to
formaldehyde requires a cysteine (Cys(35) in FrmR) conserved in all DUF156
proteins. A crystal structure of metal- and formaldehyde-sensing FrmR(E64H)
reveals that an FrmR-specific amino-terminal Pro(2) is proximal to Cys(35), and
these residues form the deduced formaldehyde-sensing site. Evidence is presented 
that implies that residues spatially close to the conserved cysteine tune the
sensitivities of DUF156 proteins above or below critical thresholds for different
effectors, generating the semblance of specificity within cells. Relative to
FrmR, RcnR is less responsive to formaldehyde in vitro, and RcnR does not sense
formaldehyde in vivo, but reciprocal mutations FrmR(P2S) and RcnR(S2P),
respectively, impair and enhance formaldehyde reactivity in vitro Formaldehyde
detoxification by FrmA requires S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione, yet glutathione
inhibits formaldehyde detection by FrmR in vivo and in vitro Quantifying the
number of FrmR molecules per cell and modeling formaldehyde modification as a
function of [formaldehyde] demonstrates that FrmR reactivity is optimized such
that FrmR is modified and frmRA is derepressed at lower [formaldehyde] than
required to generate S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione. Expression of FrmA is thereby 
coordinated with the accumulation of its substrate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.745174 
PMCID: PMC5016687
PMID: 27474740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19806-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

Generating a Metal-responsive Transcriptional Regulator to Test What Confers
Metal Sensing in Cells.

Osman D(1), Piergentili C(1), Chen J(2), Chakrabarti B(1), Foster AW(1),
Lurie-Luke E(3), Huggins TG(2), Robinson NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom.
(2)Procter and Gamble, Mason Business Centre, Cincinnati, Ohio 45040, and.
(3)Life Sciences Open Innovation, London Innovation Centre, Procter and Gamble
Technical Centres, Ltd., Egham TW20 9NW, United Kingdom.
(4)From the School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences and Department of
Chemistry, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom,
nigel.robinson@durham.ac.uk.

FrmR from Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (a CsoR/RcnR-like
transcriptional de-repressor) is shown to repress the frmRA operator-promoter,
and repression is alleviated by formaldehyde but not manganese, iron, cobalt,
nickel, copper, or Zn(II) within cells. In contrast, repression by a mutant
FrmRE64H (which gains an RcnR metal ligand) is alleviated by cobalt and Zn(II).
Unexpectedly, FrmR was found to already bind Co(II), Zn(II), and Cu(I), and
moreover metals, as well as formaldehyde, trigger an allosteric response that
weakens DNA affinity. However, the sensory metal sites of the cells' endogenous
metal sensors (RcnR, ZntR, Zur, and CueR) are all tighter than FrmR for their
cognate metals. Furthermore, the endogenous metal sensors are shown to
out-compete FrmR. The metal-sensing FrmRE64H mutant has tighter metal affinities 
than FrmR by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Gain of cobalt sensing by
FrmRE64H remains enigmatic because the cobalt affinity of FrmRE64H is
substantially weaker than that of the endogenous cobalt sensor. Cobalt sensing
requires glutathione, which may assist cobalt access, conferring a kinetic
advantage. For Zn(II), the metal affinity of FrmRE64H approaches the metal
affinities of cognate Zn(II) sensors. Counter-intuitively, the allosteric
coupling free energy for Zn(II) is smaller in metal-sensing FrmRE64H compared
with nonsensing FrmR. By determining the copies of FrmR and FrmRE64H tetramers
per cell, then estimating promoter occupancy as a function of intracellular
Zn(II) concentration, we show how a modest tightening of Zn(II) affinity, plus
weakened DNA affinity of the apoprotein, conspires to make the relative
properties of FrmRE64H (compared with ZntR and Zur) sufficient to sense Zn(II)
inside cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663427 
PMCID: PMC4528141
PMID: 26109070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcsB) AND (ompC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Aug;197(16):2713-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00263-15. Epub 2015 Jun
15.

YjjQ Represses Transcription of flhDC and Additional Loci in Escherichia coli.

Wiebe H(1), Gürlebeck D(2), Groß J(1), Dreck K(1), Pannen D(1), Ewers C(3),
Wieler LH(4), Schnetz K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center for Infection Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Hygiene and Infectious Diseases of Animals,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(4)Center for Infection Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
schnetz@uni-koeln.de.

The presumptive transcriptional regulator YjjQ has been identified as being
virulence associated in avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC). In this work,
we characterize YjjQ as transcriptional repressor of the flhDC operon, encoding
the master regulator of flagellar synthesis, and of additional loci. The latter
include gfc (capsule 4 synthesis), ompC (outer membrane porin C), yfiRNB
(regulated c-di-GMP synthesis), and loci of poorly defined function (ybhL and
ymiA-yciX). We identify the YjjQ DNA-binding sites at the flhDC and gfc promoters
and characterize a DNA-binding sequence motif present at all promoters found to
be repressed by YjjQ. At the flhDC promoter, the YjjQ DNA-binding site overlaps
the RcsA-RcsB DNA-binding site. RcsA-RcsB likewise represses the flhDC promoter, 
but the repression by YjjQ and that by RcsA-RcsB are independent of each other.
These data suggest that YjjQ is an additional regulator involved in the complex
control of flhDC at the level of transcription initiation. Furthermore, we show
that YjjQ represses motility of the E. coli K-12 laboratory strain and of
uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) strains CFT073 and 536. Regulation of flhDC, yfiRNB,
and additional loci by YjjQ may be features relevant for
pathogenicity.IMPORTANCE: Escherichia coli is a commensal and pathogenic
bacterium causing intra- and extraintestinal infections in humans and farm
animals. The pathogenicity of E. coli strains is determined by their particular
genome content, which includes essential and associated virulence factors that
control the cellular physiology in the host environment. However, the gene pools 
of commensal and pathogenic E. coli are not clearly differentiated, and the
function of virulence-associated loci needs to be characterized. In this study,
we characterize the function of yjjQ, encoding a transcription regulator that was
identified as being virulence associated in avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC). We
characterize YjjQ as transcriptional repressor of flagellar motility and of
additional loci related to pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00263-15 
PMCID: PMC4507341
PMID: 26078445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rcsB) AND (rcsD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Mol Biol. 2021 May 14;433(10):166944. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944. Epub 2021
Mar 16.

Integrating Multimeric Threading With High-throughput Experiments for Structural 
Interactome of Escherichia coli.

Gong W(1), Guerler A(2), Zhang C(2), Warner E(2), Li C(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China. Electronic address:
chunhuali@bjut.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. Electronic address:
zhng@umich.edu.

Genome-wide protein-protein interaction (PPI) determination remains a significant
unsolved problem in structural biology. The difficulty is twofold since
high-throughput experiments (HTEs) have often a relatively high false-positive
rate in assigning PPIs, and PPI quaternary structures are more difficult to solve
than tertiary structures using traditional structural biology techniques. We
proposed a uniform pipeline, Threpp, to address both problems. Starting from a
pair of monomer sequences, Threpp first threads both sequences through a complex 
structure library, where the alignment score is combined with HTE data using a
naïve Bayesian classifier model to predict the likelihood of two chains to
interact with each other. Next, quaternary complex structures of the identified
PPIs are constructed by reassembling monomeric alignments with dimeric threading 
frameworks through interface-specific structural alignments. The pipeline was
applied to the Escherichia coli genome and created 35,125 confident PPIs which is
4.5-fold higher than HTE alone. Graphic analyses of the PPI networks show a
scale-free cluster size distribution, consistent with previous studies, which was
found critical to the robustness of genome evolution and the centrality of
functionally important proteins that are essential to E. coli survival.
Furthermore, complex structure models were constructed for all predicted E. coli 
PPIs based on the quaternary threading alignments, where 6771 of them were found 
to have a high confidence score that corresponds to the correct fold of the
complexes with a TM-score >0.5, and 39 showed a close consistency with the later 
released experimental structures with an average TM-score = 0.73. These results
demonstrated the significant usefulness of threading-based homologous modeling in
both genome-wide PPI network detection and complex structural construction.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166944 
PMID: 33741411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.


2. PLoS Genet. 2020 Jul 27;16(7):e1008610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

IgaA negatively regulates the Rcs Phosphorelay via contact with the RcsD
Phosphotransfer Protein.

Wall EA(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Two-component systems and phosphorelays play central roles in the ability of
bacteria to rapidly respond to changing environments. In E. coli and related
enterobacteria, the complex Rcs phosphorelay is a critical player in the
bacterial response to antimicrobial peptides, beta-lactam antibiotics, and other 
disruptions at the cell surface. The Rcs system is unusual in that an inner
membrane protein, IgaA, is essential due to its negative regulation of the
RcsC/RcsD/RcsB phosphorelay. While it is known that IgaA transduces signals from 
the outer membrane lipoprotein RcsF, how it interacts with the phosphorelay has
remained unknown. Here we performed in vivo interaction assays and genetic
dissection of the critical proteins and found that IgaA interacts with the
phosphorelay protein RcsD, and that this interaction is necessary for regulation.
Interactions between IgaA and RcsD within their respective periplasmic domains of
these two proteins anchor repression of signaling. However, the signaling
response depends on a second interaction between cytoplasmic loop 1 of IgaA and a
truncated Per-Arndt-Sim (PAS-like) domain in RcsD. A single point mutation in the
PAS-like domain increased interactions between the two proteins and blocked
induction of the phosphorelay. IgaA may regulate RcsC, the histidine kinase that 
initiates phosphotransfer through the phosphorelay, indirectly, via its contacts 
with RcsD. Unlike RcsD, and unlike many other histidine kinases, the periplasmic 
domain of RcsC is dispensable for the response to signals that induce the Rcs
phosphorelay system. The multiple contacts between IgaA and RcsD constitute a
poised sensing system, preventing potentially toxic over-activation of this
phosphorelay while enabling it to rapidly and quantitatively respond to signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008610 
PMCID: PMC7418988
PMID: 32716926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


3. J Clin Microbiol. 2019 Dec 23;58(1). pii: e01309-19. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01309-19.
Print 2019 Dec 23.

Origin and Evolution of Hybrid Shiga Toxin-Producing and Uropathogenic
Escherichia coli Strains of Sequence Type 141.

Gati NS(1), Middendorf-Bauchart B(1), Bletz S(1), Dobrindt U(2), Mellmann A(3).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, National Consulting
Laboratory for Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS), Münster, Germany.
(2)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, Microbial
Genome-Plasticity, Münster, Germany.
(3)University Hospital Münster, Institute of Hygiene, National Consulting
Laboratory for Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS), Münster, Germany
mellmann@uni-muenster.de.

Hybrid Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) and uropathogenic E. coli
(UPEC) strains of multilocus sequence type 141 (ST141) cause both urinary tract
infections and diarrhea in humans and are phylogenetically positioned between
STEC and UPEC strains. We used comparative genomic analysis of 85 temporally and 
spatially diverse ST141 E. coli strains, including 14 STEC/UPEC hybrids,
collected in Germany (n = 13) and the United States (n = 1) to reconstruct their 
molecular evolution. Whole-genome sequencing data showed that 89% of the ST141 E.
coli strains either were STEC/UPEC hybrids or contained a mixture of virulence
genes from other pathotypes. Core genome analysis and ancestral reconstruction
revealed that the ST141 E. coli strains clustered into two lineages that evolved 
from a common ancestor in the mid-19th century. The STEC/UPEC hybrid emerged
∼100 years ago by acquiring an stx prophage, which integrated into previously
unknown insertion site between rcsB and rcsD, followed by the insertion of a
pathogenicity island (PAI) similar to PAI II of UPEC strain 536 (PAI II536-like).
The two variants of PAI II536-like were associated with tRNA genes leuX and pheU,
respectively. Finally, microevolution within PAI II536-like and acquisition of
the enterohemorrhagic E. coli plasmid were observed. Our data suggest that
intestinal pathogenic E. coli (IPEC)/extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC)
hybrids are widespread and that selection pressure within the ST141 E. coli
population led to the emergence of the STEC/UPEC hybrid as a clinically important
subgroup. We hypothesize that ST141 E. coli strains serve as a melting pot for
pathogroup conversion between IPEC and ExPEC, contrasting the classical theory of
pathogen emergence from nonpathogens and corroborating our recent phenomenon of
heteropathogenicity among pathogenic E. coli strains.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01309-19 
PMCID: PMC6935910
PMID: 31619530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 9;13(11):e0207181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207181.
eCollection 2018.

Reassessing the role of the Escherichia coli CpxAR system in sensing surface
contact.

Kimkes TEP(1), Heinemann M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Biology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

For proper biofilm formation, bacteria must have mechanisms in place to sense
adhesion to surfaces. In Escherichia coli, the CpxAR and RcsCDB systems have been
reported to sense surfaces. The CpxAR system is widely considered to be
responsible for sensing attachment, specifically to hydrophobic surfaces. Here,
using both single-cell and population-level analyses, we confirm RcsCDB
activation upon surface contact, but find that the CpxAR system is not activated,
in contrast to what had earlier been reported. Thus, the role of CpxAR in surface
sensing and initiation of biofilm formation should be reconsidered.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207181 
PMCID: PMC6226299
PMID: 30412611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


5. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2018 Sep 8;72:111-139. doi:
10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640. Epub 2018 Jun 13.

The Complex Rcs Regulatory Cascade.

Wall E(1), Majdalani N(1), Gottesman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; emails: erin.wall@nih.gov ,
majdalan@mail.nih.gov , gottesms@mail.nih.gov.

RcsB, a response regulator of the FixJ/NarL family, is at the center of a complex
network of regulatory inputs and outputs. Cell surface stress is sensed by an
outer membrane lipoprotein, RcsF, which regulates interactions of the inner
membrane protein IgaA, lifting negative regulation of a phosphorelay. In vivo
evidence supports a pathway in which histidine kinase RcsC transfers phosphate to
phosphotransfer protein RcsD, resulting in phosphorylation of RcsB. RcsB acts
either alone or in combination with RcsA to positively regulate capsule synthesis
and synthesis of small RNA (sRNA) RprA as well as other genes, and to negatively 
regulate motility. RcsB in combination with other FixJ/NarL auxiliary proteins
regulates yet other functions, independent of RcsB phosphorylation. Proper
expression of Rcs and its targets is critical for success of Escherichia coli
commensal strains, for proper development of biofilm, and for virulence in some
pathogens. New understanding of how the Rcs phosphorelay works provides insight
into the flexibility of the two-component system paradigm.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-micro-090817-062640 
PMID: 29897834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2016 May 13;198(11):1576-1584. doi: 10.1128/JB.00094-16. Print 2016 
Jun 1.

Effects of Lipopolysaccharide Core Sugar Deficiency on Colanic Acid Biosynthesis 
in Escherichia coli.

Ren G(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Li Y(1), Hu X(1), Wang X(3)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China xwang@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(4)Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, China.

When 10 Escherichia coli mutant strains with defects in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
core biosynthesis were grown on agar medium at 30°C, four of them, the ΔwaaF,
ΔwaaG, ΔwaaP, and ΔwaaB strains, formed mucoid colonies, while the other six, the
ΔwaaU, ΔwaaR, ΔwaaO, ΔwaaC, ΔwaaQ, and ΔwaaY strains, did not. Using light
microscopy with tannin mordant staining, the presence of exopolysaccharide around
the cells of the mutants that formed mucoid colonies could be discerned. The
ΔwaaF mutant produced the largest amounts of exopolysaccharide, regardless of
whether it was grown on agar or in liquid medium. The exopolysaccharide was
isolated from the liquid growth medium of ΔwaaF cells, hydrolyzed, and analyzed
by high-performance liquid chromatography with an ion-exchange column, and the
results indicated that the exopolysaccharide was consistent with colanic acid.
When the key genes related to the biosynthesis of colanic acid, i.e., wza, wzb,
wzc, and wcaA, were deleted in the ΔwaaF background, the exopolysaccharide could 
not be produced any more, further confirming that it was colanic acid. Colanic
acid could not be produced in strains in which rcsA, rcsB, rcsD, or rcsF was
deleted in the ΔwaaF background, but a reduced level of colanic acid production
was detected when the rcsC gene was deleted, suggesting that a change of
lipopolysaccharide structure in ΔwaaF cells might be sensed by the RcsCDB
phosphorelay system, leading to the production of colanic acid. The results
demonstrate that E. coli cells can activate colanic acid production through the
RcsCDB phosphorelay system in response to a structural deficiency of
lipopolysaccharide.IMPORTANCE: Lipopolysaccharide and colanic acid are important 
forms of exopolysaccharide for Escherichia coli cells. Their metabolism and
biological significance have been investigated, but their interrelation with the 
cell stress response process is not understood. This study demonstrates, for the 
first time, that E. coli cells can activate colanic acid production through the
RcsCDB phosphorelay system in response to a structural change of
lipopolysaccharide, suggesting that bacterial cells can monitor the outer
membrane integrity, which is essential for cell survival and damage repair.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00094-16 
PMCID: PMC4959291
PMID: 27002133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2015 Apr;161(Pt 4):903-13. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000050.
Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Deletion analysis of RcsC reveals a novel signalling pathway controlling
poly-N-acetylglucosamine synthesis and biofilm formation in Escherichia coli.

Oropeza R(1), Salgado-Bravo R(2), Calva E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico oropeza@ibt.unam.mx.
(2)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico.

RcsC is a hybrid histidine kinase that forms part of a phospho-relay signal
transduction pathway with RcsD and RcsB. Besides the typical domains of a sensor 
kinase, i.e. the periplasmic (P), linker (L), dimerization and H-containing (A), 
and ATP-binding (B) domains, RcsC possesses a receiver domain (D) at the
carboxy-terminal domain. To study the role played by each of the RcsC domains,
four plasmids containing several of these domains were constructed (PLAB, LAB, AB
and ABD) and transformed into Escherichia coli K-12 strain BW25113. Different
amounts of biofilm were produced, depending on the RcsC domains expressed: the
plasmid expressing the ABD subdomains produced the highest amount of biofilm.
This phenotype was also observed when the plasmids were transformed in a ΔrcsCDB 
strain. Biofilm formation was abolished in the pgaABCD and nhaR backgrounds. The 
results indicate the existence of a novel signalling pathway that depends on
RcsC, yet independent of RcsD and RcsB, that activates the pgaABCD operon and, as
a consequence, biofilm formation. This signalling pathway involves the secondary 
metabolite acetyl phosphate and the response regulator OmpR.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000050 
PMID: 25667010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(14):3708-22. doi: 10.1128/JB.00361-12. Epub 2012 May
11.

Salmonella biofilm development depends on the phosphorylation status of RcsB.

Latasa C(1), García B, Echeverz M, Toledo-Arana A, Valle J, Campoy S, García-del 
Portillo F, Solano C, Lasa I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología, Idab, Universidad Pública de
Navarra-CSIC-Gobierno de Navarra, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain.

The Rcs phosphorelay pathway is a complex signaling pathway involved in the
regulation of many cell surface structures in enteric bacteria. In response to
environmental stimuli, the sensor histidine kinase (RcsC) autophosphorylates and 
then transfers the phosphate through intermediary steps to the response regulator
(RcsB), which, once phosphorylated, regulates gene expression. Here, we show that
Salmonella biofilm development depends on the phosphorylation status of RcsB.
Thus, unphosphorylated RcsB, hitherto assumed to be inactive, is essential to
activate the expression of the biofilm matrix compounds. The prevention of RcsB
phosphorylation either by the disruption of the phosphorelay at the RcsC or RcsD 
level or by the production of a nonphosphorylatable RcsB allele induces biofilm
development. On the contrary, the phosphorylation of RcsB by the constitutive
activation of the Rcs pathway inhibits biofilm development, an effect that can be
counteracted by the introduction of a nonphosphorylatable RcsB allele. The
inhibition of biofilm development by phosphorylated RcsB is due to the repression
of CsgD expression, through a mechanism dependent on the accumulation of the
small noncoding RNA RprA. Our results indicate that unphosphorylated RcsB plays
an active role for integrating environmental signals and, more broadly, that RcsB
phosphorylation acts as a key switch between planktonic and sessile life-styles
in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00361-12 
PMCID: PMC3393492
PMID: 22582278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(13):3475-85. doi: 10.1128/JB.06596-11. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

The response regulator RcsB activates expression of Mat fimbriae in meningitic
Escherichia coli.

Lehti TA(1), Heikkinen J, Korhonen TK, Westerlund-Wikström B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Microbiology, Department of Biosciences, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The common colonization factor of Escherichia coli, the Mat (also termed ECP)
fimbria, functions to advance biofilm formation on inert surfaces as well as
bacterial adherence to epithelial cells and subsequent colonization. We used
global mini-Tn5 transposon mutagenesis to identify novel regulators of biofilm
formation by the meningitic E. coli isolate IHE 3034. Of the 4,418 transformants,
we found 17 that were impaired in biofilm formation. Most of these mutants were
affected in lipopolysaccharide synthesis and were reduced in growth but not in
Mat fimbria expression. In contrast, two mutants grew well but did not express
Mat fimbria. The insertions in these two mutants were located at different sites 
of the rcsB gene, which encodes a DNA-binding response regulator of the Rcs
response regulon. The mutations abrogated temperature-dependent biofilm formation
by IHE 3034, and the phenotype correlated with loss of mat expression. The defect
in biofilm formation in the rcsB mutant was reversed upon complementation with
rcsB as well as by overexpression of structural mat genes but not by
overexpression of the fimbria-specific activator gene matA. Monitoring of the mat
operon promoter activity with chromosomal reporter fusions showed that the RcsB
protein and an RcsAB box in the mat regulatory region, but not RcsC, RcsD, AckA, 
and Pta, are essential for initiation of mat transcription. Gel retardation
assays showed that RcsB specifically binds to the mat promoter DNA, which enables
its function in promoting biofilm formation by E. coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.06596-11 
PMCID: PMC3434760
PMID: 22522901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Structure. 2011 Apr 13;19(4):577-87. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2011.01.012.

Structural insights into Rcs phosphotransfer: the newly identified RcsD-ABL
domain enhances interaction with the response regulator RcsB.

Schmöe K(1), Rogov VV, Rogova NY, Löhr F, Güntert P, Bernhard F, Dötsch V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, 60438 Frankfurt/Main,
Germany.

The Rcs-signaling system is one of the most remarkable phosphorelay pathways in
Enterobacteriaceae, comprising several membrane-bound and soluble proteins.
Within the complex phosphotransfer pathway, the histidine phosphotransferase
(HPt) domain of the RcsD membrane-bound component serves as a crucial factor in
modulating the phosphorylation state of the transcription factor RcsB. We have
identified a new domain, RcsD-ABL, located N terminally to RcsD-HPt that
interacts with RcsB as well. We have determined its structure, characterized its 
interaction interface with RcsB, and built a structural model of the complex of
the RcsD-ABL domain with RcsB. Our results indicate that the effector domain of
RcsB, which normally binds to DNA, is recognized by RcsD-ABL, whereas the HPt
domain interacts with the phosphoreceiver domain of RcsB.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2011.01.012 
PMID: 21481780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((xapR) AND (nupG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5506-16.

Identification and characterization of genes (xapA, xapB, and xapR) involved in
xanthosine catabolism in Escherichia coli.

Seeger C(1), Poulsen C, Dandanell G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

We have characterized four genes from the 52-min region on the Escherichia coli
linkage map. Three of these genes are directly involved in the metabolism of
xanthosine, whereas the function of the fourth gene is unknown. One of the genes 
(xapA) encodes xanthosine phosphorylase. The second gene, named xapB, encodes a
polypeptide that shows strong similarity to the nucleoside transport protein
NupG. The genes xapA and xapB are located clockwise of a gene identified as xapR,
which encodes a positive regulator belonging to the LysR family and is required
for the expression of xapA and xapB. The genes xapA and xapB form an operon, and 
their expression was strictly dependent on the presence of both the XapR protein 
and the inducer xanthosine. Expression of the xapR gene is constitutive and not
autoregulated, unlike the case for many other LysR family proteins. In minicells,
the XapB polypeptide was found primarily in the membrane fraction, indicating
that XapB is a transport protein like NupG and is involved in the transport of
xanthosine.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.19.5506-5516.1995 
PMCID: PMC177358
PMID: 7559336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (yeeE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Environ Microbiol. 2010 Oct;12(10):2846-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02265.x.

A genetic analysis of the response of Escherichia coli to cobalt stress.

Fantino JR(1), Py B, Fontecave M, Barras F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Bactérienne, CNRS UPR-9043, Institut de Microbiologie de
la Méditerranée, 31 Chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13009 Marseille, France.

Cobalt can be toxic and the way cells adapt to its presence is largely unknown.
Here we carried out a transcriptomic analysis of Escherichia coli exposed to
cobalt. A limited number of genes were either up- or downregulated. Upregulated
genes include the isc and the nfuA genes encoding Fe/S biogenesis assisting
factors, and the rcnA gene encoding a cobalt efflux system. Downregulated genes
are implicated in anaerobic metabolism (narK, nirB, hybO, grcA), metal transport 
(feoB, nikA), sulfate/thiosulfate import (cysP), and one is of unknown function
(yeeE). Cobalt regulation of isc, nfuA, hybO, cysP and yeeE genes was found to
involve IscR, a Fe/S transcriptional regulator. Previously, the Suf Fe/S
biogenesis machinery was found to be important for cobalt stress adaptation, but 
suf genes did not show up in the microarray analysis. Therefore, we used qRT-PCR 
analysis and found that cobalt induced the suf operon expression. Moreover,
kinetic analysis of the cobalt-mediated induction of the suf operon expression
allowed us to propose that cobalt toxicity is caused first by impaired Fe/S
biogenesis, followed by decreased iron bioavailability and eventually oxidative
stress.

© 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02265.x 
PMID: 20545747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (fdx)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Feb;87(3):478-92. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12052. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Regulation of iron-sulphur cluster homeostasis through transcriptional control of
the Isc pathway by [2Fe-2S]-IscR in Escherichia coli.

Giel JL(1), Nesbit AD, Mettert EL, Fleischhacker AS, Wanta BT, Kiley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

Fe-S clusters are essential across the biological world, yet how cells regulate
expression of Fe-S cluster biogenesis pathways to cope with changes in Fe-S
cluster demand is not well understood. Here, we describe the mechanism by which
IscR, a [2Fe-2S] cluster-containing regulator of Escherichia coli, adjusts the
synthesis of the Isc Fe-S biogenesis pathway to maintain Fe-S homeostasis. Our
data indicate that a negative feedback loop operates to repress transcription of 
the iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx operon, encoding IscR and the Isc machinery, through
binding of [2Fe-2S]-IscR to two upstream binding sites. IscR was shown to require
primarily the Isc pathway for synthesis of its Fe-S cluster, providing a link
between IscR activity and demands for Fe-S clusters through the levels of the Isc
system. Surprisingly, the isc operon was more repressed under anaerobic
conditions, indicating increased Fe-S cluster occupancy of IscR and decreased
Fe-S cluster biogenesis demand relative to aerobic conditions. Consistent with
this notion, overexpression of a Fe-S protein under aerobic conditions, but not
under anaerobic conditions, led to derepression of P(iscR). Together, these data 
show how transcriptional control of iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx by [2Fe-2S]-IscR allows
E. coli to respond efficiently to varying Fe-S demands.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12052 
PMCID: PMC4108476
PMID: 23075318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 19;374(2):399-404. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.050. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Regulation of Escherichia coli IscS desulfurase activity by ferrous iron and
cysteine.

Wu G(1), Li P, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou
310058, China. wugenfu@zju.edu.cn

IscS plays a principal role in the synthesis of sulfur-containing biomolecules.
It is known that the expression of iscS can be negatively regulated by IscR, the 
first gene product of iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx. What governs the regulation of cysteine 
desulfurase activity, however, is unknown. Here, we report that IscS from
Escherichia coli is able to bind iron with an association constant of
1.6x10(17)M(-1) to form an IscS-iron complex. IscS is also capable of binding
both iron and sulfide to form an IscS-iron-sulfide complex with a higher
affinity. The desulfurase activity is gradually inhibited as the amount of iron
and sulfide bound to IscS increases. When 2Fe-2S binds IscS, about 20% of the
activity is inhibited; when 8Fe-8S adheres to IscS, about 70% of the activity is 
inhibited. Thus, the cell is able to modulate its desulfurase activity with the
formation of an IscS-iron-sulfide complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.050 
PMID: 18639525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 2006 May;60(4):1058-75.

IscR-dependent gene expression links iron-sulphur cluster assembly to the control
of O2-regulated genes in Escherichia coli.

Giel JL(1), Rodionov D, Liu M, Blattner FR, Kiley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, 
University of Winsconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

IscR is an iron-sulphur (Fe-S) cluster-containing transcription factor that
represses transcription of the operon containing its own gene and the
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx genes, whose products are involved in Fe-S cluster biogenesis.
In this study, global transcriptional profiling of Escherichia coli IscR(+) and
IscR(-) strains grown under aerobic and anaerobic conditions indicated that 40
genes in 20 predicted operons were regulated by IscR. DNase I footprinting and/or
in vitro transcription reactions identified seven new promoters under direct IscR
control. Among these were genes encoding known or proposed functions in Fe-S
cluster biogenesis (sufABCDSE, yadR and yhgI) and Fe-S cluster-containing
anaerobic respiratory enzymes (hyaABCDEF, hybOABCDEFG and napFDAGHBC). The
finding that IscR repressed expression of the hyaA, hybO and napF promoters
specifically under aerobic growth conditions suggests a new mechanism to explain 
their upregulation under anaerobic growth conditions. Phylogenetic footprinting
of the DNase I protected regions of seven promoters implies that there are at
least two different classes of IscR binding sites conserved among many bacteria. 
The findings presented here indicate a more general role of IscR in the
regulation of Fe-S cluster biogenesis and that IscR contributes to the O(2)
regulation of several promoters controlling the expression of anaerobic Fe-S
proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05160.x 
PMID: 16677314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biochem. 2004 Aug;136(2):199-209.

Interchangeability and distinct properties of bacterial Fe-S cluster assembly
systems: functional replacement of the isc and suf operons in Escherichia coli
with the nifSU-like operon from Helicobacter pylori.

Tokumoto U(1), Kitamura S, Fukuyama K, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka,
Osaka 560-0043.

The assembly of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, a key step in the post-translational
maturation of Fe-S proteins, is mediated by a complex apparatus. In E. coli, this
process involves two independent systems called ISC and SUF encoded by the
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx gene cluster and sufABCDSE operon, respectively. Another system,
termed NIF (nifSU), is required for the maturation of nitrogenase in
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. We have developed a novel genetic system to gain
further insight into these multi-component systems, and to determine how ISC, SUF
and NIF might differ in their roles in Fe-S assembly. We have constructed an E.
coli mutant lacking both the isc and suf operons, and this strain can only
survive in the presence of a complementing plasmid. Using the plasmid replacement
technique, we examined the isc and suf operons, and identified the genes
essential for the function. Additionally, we have found that nifSU-like genes
cloned from Helicobacter pylori are functionally exchangeable with the isc and
suf operons. Thus, the NIF-like system participates in the maturation of a wide
variety of Fe-S proteins. An increased ability of NIF to complement isc and suf
loss was seen under anaerobic conditions. This may explain why the NIF system is 
only found in a limited number of bacterial species, and most other organisms
prefer the ISC and/or SUF systems. While the differences between ISC and SUF were
small with respect to the complementing activity, the SUF system appears to be
more advantageous for bacterial growth in the presence of hydrogen peroxide.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvh104 
PMID: 15496591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (hscA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):14895-900. Epub 2001 Dec 11.

IscR, an Fe-S cluster-containing transcription factor, represses expression of
Escherichia coli genes encoding Fe-S cluster assembly proteins.

Schwartz CJ(1), Giel JL, Patschkowski T, Luther C, Ruzicka FJ, Beinert H, Kiley
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, 
and Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):14751-3.

IscR (iron-sulfur cluster regulator) is encoded by an ORF located immediately
upstream of genes coding for the Escherichia coli Fe-S cluster assembly proteins,
IscS, IscU, and IscA. IscR shares amino acid similarity with MarA, a member of
the MarA/SoxS/Rob family of transcription factors. In this study, we found that
IscR functions as a repressor of the iscRSUA operon, because strains deleted for 
iscR have increased expression of this operon. In addition, in vitro
transcription reactions established a direct role for IscR in repression of the
iscR promoter. Analysis of IscR by electron paramagnetic resonance showed that
the anaerobically isolated protein contains a [2Fe-2S](1+) cluster. The Fe-S
cluster appears to be important for IscR function, because repression of iscR
expression is significantly reduced in strains containing null mutations of the
Fe-S cluster assembly genes iscS or hscA. The finding that IscR activity is
decreased in strain backgrounds in which Fe-S cluster assembly is impaired
suggests that this protein may be part of a novel autoregulatory mechanism that
senses the Fe-S cluster assembly status of cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.251550898 
PMCID: PMC64955
PMID: 11742080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((iscR) AND (hscB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):63-71.

Genetic analysis of the isc operon in Escherichia coli involved in the biogenesis
of cellular iron-sulfur proteins.

Tokumoto U(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

The iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, the nonheme-iron cofactor essential for the
activity of many proteins, is incorporated into target proteins with the aid of
complex machinery. In bacteria, several proteins encoded by the
iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-ORF3 cluster (isc operon) have been proposed to execute crucial
tasks in the assembly of Fe-S clusters. To elucidate the in vivo function, we
have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis of the genes in the Escherichia 
coli isc operon. In all functional tests, i.e. growth rate, nutritional
requirements and activities of Fe-S enzymes, the inactivation of the iscS gene
elicited the most drastic alteration. Strains with mutations in the iscU, hscB,
hscA, and fdx genes also exhibited conspicuous phenotypical consequences almost
identical to one another. The effect of the inactivation of iscA was small but
appreciable on Fe-S enzymes. In contrast, mutants with inactivated iscR or ORF3
showed virtually no differences from wild-type cells. The requirement of
iscSUA-hscBA-fdx for the assembly of Fe-S clusters was further confirmed by
complementation experiments using a mutant strain in which the entire isc operon 
was deleted. Our findings support the conclusion that IscS, via cysteine
desulfurase activity, provides the sulfur that is subsequently incorporated into 
Fe-S clusters by assembler machinery comprising of the iscUA-hscBA-fdx gene
products. The results presented here indicate crucial roles for IscU, HscB, HscA,
and Fdx as central components of the assembler machinery and also provide
evidence for interactions among them.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a002963 
PMID: 11432781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rseB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):373-85.

The sigmaE-mediated response to extracytoplasmic stress in Escherichia coli is
transduced by RseA and RseB, two negative regulators of sigmaE.

De Las Peñas A(1), Connolly L, Gross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

The extracytoplasmic stress response in Escherichia coli is controlled by the
alternative sigma factor, sigma(E). sigma(E) activity is uniquely induced by the 
accumulation of outer membrane protein precursors in the periplasmic space, and
leads to the increased production of several proteins, including the periplasmic 
protease DegP, that are thought to be required for maintaining cellular integrity
under stress conditions. Genetic and biochemical experiments show that sigma(E)
activity is under the control of three genes, rseABC (for regulator of sigma E), 
encoded immediately downstream of the sigma factor. Deletion of rseA leads to a
25-fold induction of sigma(E) activity. RseA is predicted to be an inner membrane
protein, and the purified cytoplasmic domain binds to and inhibits
sigma(E)-directed transcription in vitro, indicating that RseA acts as an
anti-sigma factor. Deletion of rseB leads to a slight induction of sigma(E),
indicating that RseB is also a negative regulator of sigma(E). RseB is a
periplasmic protein and was found to co-purify with the periplasmic domain of
RseA, indicating that RseB probably exerts negative activity on sigma(E) through 
RseA. Deletion of rseC, in contrast, has no effect on sigma(E) activity under
steady-state conditions. Under induction conditions, strains lacking RseB and/or 
C show wild-type induction of sigma(E) activity, indicating either the presence
of multiple pathways regulating sigma(E) activity, or the ability of RseA alone
to both sense and transmit information to sigma(E).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3611718.x 
PMID: 9159523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rseA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 May;74(9):2690-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02809-07. Epub
2008 Mar 14.

The R1 conjugative plasmid increases Escherichia coli biofilm formation through
an envelope stress response.

Yang X(1), Ma Q, Wood TK.

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-3122, USA.

Differential gene expression in biofilm cells suggests that adding the
derepressed conjugative plasmid R1drd19 increases biofilm formation by affecting 
genes related to envelope stress (rseA and cpxAR), biofilm formation (bssR and
cstA), energy production (glpDFK), acid resistance (gadABCEX and hdeABD), and
cell motility (csgBEFG, yehCD, yadC, and yfcV); genes encoding outer membrane
proteins (ompACF), phage shock proteins (pspABCDE), and cold shock proteins
(cspACDEG); and phage-related genes. To investigate the link between the
identified genes and biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19, 40 isogenic 
mutants were classified according to their different biofilm formation
phenotypes. Cells with class I mutations (those in rseA, bssR, cpxA, and ompA)
exhibited no difference from the wild-type strain in biofilm formation and no
increase in biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19. Cells with class II
mutations (those in gatC, yagI, ompC, cspA, pspD, pspB, ymgB, gadC, pspC, ymgA,
slp, cpxP, cpxR, cstA, rseC, ompF, and yqjD) displayed increased biofilm
formation compared to the wild-type strain but decreased biofilm formation upon
the addition of R1drd19. Class III mutants showed increased biofilm formation
compared to the wild-type strain and increased biofilm formation upon the
addition of R1drd19. Cells with class IV mutations displayed increased biofilm
formation compared to the wild-type strain but little difference upon the
addition of R1drd19, and class V mutants exhibited no difference from the
wild-type strain but increased biofilm formation upon the addition of R1drd19.
Therefore, proteins encoded by the genes corresponding to the class I mutant
phenotype are involved in R1drd19-promoted biofilm formation, primarily through
their impact on cell motility. We hypothesize that the pili formed upon the
addition of the conjugative plasmid disrupt the membrane (induce ompA) and
activate the two-component system CpxAR as well as the other envelope stress
response system, RseA-sigma(E), both of which, along with BssR, play a key role
in bacterial biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02809-07 
PMCID: PMC2394867
PMID: 18344336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):373-85.

The sigmaE-mediated response to extracytoplasmic stress in Escherichia coli is
transduced by RseA and RseB, two negative regulators of sigmaE.

De Las Peñas A(1), Connolly L, Gross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

The extracytoplasmic stress response in Escherichia coli is controlled by the
alternative sigma factor, sigma(E). sigma(E) activity is uniquely induced by the 
accumulation of outer membrane protein precursors in the periplasmic space, and
leads to the increased production of several proteins, including the periplasmic 
protease DegP, that are thought to be required for maintaining cellular integrity
under stress conditions. Genetic and biochemical experiments show that sigma(E)
activity is under the control of three genes, rseABC (for regulator of sigma E), 
encoded immediately downstream of the sigma factor. Deletion of rseA leads to a
25-fold induction of sigma(E) activity. RseA is predicted to be an inner membrane
protein, and the purified cytoplasmic domain binds to and inhibits
sigma(E)-directed transcription in vitro, indicating that RseA acts as an
anti-sigma factor. Deletion of rseB leads to a slight induction of sigma(E),
indicating that RseB is also a negative regulator of sigma(E). RseB is a
periplasmic protein and was found to co-purify with the periplasmic domain of
RseA, indicating that RseB probably exerts negative activity on sigma(E) through 
RseA. Deletion of rseC, in contrast, has no effect on sigma(E) activity under
steady-state conditions. Under induction conditions, strains lacking RseB and/or 
C show wild-type induction of sigma(E) activity, indicating either the presence
of multiple pathways regulating sigma(E) activity, or the ability of RseA alone
to both sense and transmit information to sigma(E).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3611718.x 
PMID: 9159523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 2;22(11):2614-22.

A reducing system of the superoxide sensor SoxR in Escherichia coli.

Koo MS(1), Lee JH, Rah SY, Yeo WS, Lee JW, Lee KL, Koh YS, Kang SO, Roe JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Laboratory of Biophysics, School of
Biological Sciences, and Institute of Microbiology, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The soxRS regulon functions in protecting Escherichia coli cells against
superoxide and nitric oxide. When SoxR is activated by oxidation of its [2Fe-2S] 
cluster, it increases the synthesis of SoxS, which then activates its target gene
expression. How the oxidized SoxR returns to and is maintained in its reduced
state has been under question. To identity genes that constitute the
SoxR-reducing system, we screened an E.coli mutant library carrying a chromosomal
soxSp::lacZ fusion, for constitutive mutants. Mutations mapped to two loci: the
rsxABCDGE operon (named for reducer of SoxR) that is highly homologous to the
rnfABCDGE operon in Rhodobacter capsulatus involved in transferring electrons to 
nitrogenase, and the rseC gene in the rpoE-rseABC operon. In-frame deletion of
each open reading frame in the rsxABCDGE operon produced a similar constitutive
phenotype. The double mutation of rsx and rseC suggested that rsxABCDGE and rseC 
gene products act together in the same pathway in reducing SoxR. Electron
paramagnetic resonance analysis of SoxR and measurement of re-reduction kinetics 
support the proposal that rsx and rseC gene products constitute a reducing system
for SoxR.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg252 
PMCID: PMC156749
PMID: 12773378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rseC) AND (rseD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


############# ((rseB) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Oct 31;199(23). pii: e00484-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00484-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Circuitry Linking the Global Csr- and σE-Dependent Cell Envelope Stress Response 
Systems.

Yakhnin H(1)(2), Aichele R(1)(2), Ades SE(1), Romeo T(3), Babitzke P(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for RNA Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA pxb28@psu.edu.

CsrA of Escherichia coli is an RNA-binding protein that globally regulates a wide
variety of cellular processes and behaviors, including carbon metabolism,
motility, biofilm formation, and the stringent response. CsrB and CsrC are small 
RNAs (sRNAs) that sequester CsrA, thereby preventing CsrA-mRNA interaction. RpoE 
(σE) is the extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor of E. coli Previous RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) studies identified rpoE mRNA as a CsrA target. Here, we
explored the regulation of rpoE by CsrA and found that CsrA represses rpoE
translation. Gel mobility shift, footprint, and toeprint studies identified three
CsrA binding sites in the rpoE leader transcript, one of which overlaps the rpoE 
Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, while another overlaps the rpoE translation
initiation codon. Coupled in vitro transcription-translation experiments showed
that CsrA represses rpoE translation by binding to these sites. We further
demonstrate that σE indirectly activates the transcription of csrB and csrC,
leading to increased sequestration of CsrA, such that repression of rpoE by CsrA 
is reduced. We propose that the Csr system fine-tunes the σE-dependent cell
envelope stress response. We also identified a 51-amino-acid coding sequence
whose stop codon overlaps the rpoE start codon and demonstrate that rpoE is
translationally coupled with this upstream open reading frame (ORF51). The loss
of coupling reduces rpoE translation by more than 50%. Identification of a
translationally coupled ORF upstream of rpoE suggests that this previously
unannotated protein may participate in the cell envelope stress response. In
keeping with existing nomenclature, we named ORF51 rseD, resulting in an operon
arrangement of rseD-rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC IMPORTANCE CsrA posttranscriptionally
represses genes required for bacterial stress responses, including the stringent 
response, catabolite repression, and the RpoS (σS)-mediated general stress
response. We show that CsrA represses the translation of rpoE, encoding the
extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor, and that σE indirectly activates
the transcription of csrB and csrC, resulting in reciprocal regulation of these
two global regulatory systems. These findings suggest that extracytoplasmic
stress leads to derepression of rpoE translation by CsrA, and CsrA-mediated
repression helps reset RpoE abundance to prestress levels once envelope damage is
repaired. The discovery of an ORF, rseD, translationally coupled with rpoE adds
further complexity to translational control of rpoE.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00484-17 
PMCID: PMC5686586
PMID: 28924029 


2. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 18;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0.

An extracytoplasmic function sigma factor-dependent periplasmic glutathione
peroxidase is involved in oxidative stress response of Shewanella oneidensis.

Dai J(1)(2), Wei H(3)(4), Tian C(5), Damron FH(6), Zhou J(7), Qiu D(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
daijingcheng@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
weihehong2011@ihb.ac.cn.
(5)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Hubei University of Engineering, 272
Jiaotong Avenue, Xiaogan, 432000, China. 2382728765@qq.com.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
fdamron@hsc.wvu.edu.
(7)Institute for Environmental Genomics and Department of Botany and
Microbiology, The University of Oklahoma, Stephenson Research and Technology
Center, 101 David L. Boren Blvd, Norman, OK 73019, USA. jzhou@ou.edu.
(8)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 South Donghu Road,
Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430072, China. qiu@ihb.ac.cn.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
qiu@ihb.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria use alternative sigma factors (σs) to regulate
condition-specific gene expression for survival and Shewanella harbors multiple
ECF (extracytoplasmic function) σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. Here
we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoE-like operons in the strain MR-1:
rpoE-rseA-rseB-rseC and rpoE2-chrR.
RESULTS: RpoE was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in
the minimal medium, and high salinity. The degP/htrA orthologue, required for
growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is
absent in Shewanella, while the degQ gene is RpoE-regulated and is required for
bacterial growth at high temperature. RpoE2 was essential for the optimal growth 
in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoE2 mutant was sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide and paraquat. The operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue (HemH2) and
a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase (PgpD) was identified as RpoE2-dependent.
PgpD exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the
oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase CgpD under
tested conditions. The rpoE2-chrR operon and the identified regulon genes,
including pgpD and hemH2, are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or
deep-sea Shewanella strains.
CONCLUSION: In S. oneidensis MR-1, the RpoE-dependent degQ gene is required for
optimal growth under high temperature. The rpoE2 and RpoE2-dependent pgpD gene
encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress
responses. But rpoE2 is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and 
it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a
tradeoff between the salt resistance and RpoE2-mediated oxidative stress
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0357-0 
PMCID: PMC4336711
PMID: 25887418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genes Cells. 2009 Jul;14(7):885-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Dissection of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli: roles of RpoE
regulators RseA, RseB and periplasmic folding catalyst PpiD.

Noor R(1), Murata M, Nagamitsu H, Klein G, Raina S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of sigma(E)-dependent cell lysis, we examined the
consequences of deletion derivatives of rpoE regulators rseA, rseB and rseC on
sigma(E) transcription, on levels of free versus membrane-bound sigma(E) and on
OMP-biogenesis limiting factor(s) that could impact cell lysis. RT-PCR showed
that individual nonpolar DeltarseA and DeltarseB increased the rpoE expression to
varying extents, with pronounced induction in DeltarseA. Significantly the ratio 
of soluble (free) versus membrane-bound form of RpoE increased in DeltarseA,
however without increase of its total amount, unraveling furthermore complexity
in RpoE regulation. Significant characteristics of cell lysis, accompanied by a
severe reduction in the levels of periplasmic OMP-folding factor (PpiD), were
observed in DeltarseA. The cell-lysis phenotype of DeltarseA was suppressed by
either rseA or ppiD plasmids, but neither by rseB nor by rseC clones. However,
the cell lysis of the wild-type strain was almost completely repressed not only
by the rseA clone but also by the rseB clone, suggesting RseB might be limiting
in vivo. Thus, increase in the ratio of free sigma(E) in rseA mutants with a
concomitant reduction in PpiD levels can account for sigma(E)-dependent lysis in 
concert with a potential role of small RNAs on the lysis process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01318.x 
PMID: 19549168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):69-74.

Cloning and characterization of the rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE
factor from the deep-sea piezophilic Shewanella violacea strain DSS12.

Kawano H(1), Abe F, Nakasone K, Kato C, Yoshida Y, Usami R, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Extremobiosphere Research Center (XBR), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science 
and Technology (JAMSTEC), 2-15 Natsushima-cho, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 237-0061,
Japan. kawanoh@jamstec.go.jp

The rpoE gene encoding an RNA polymerase sigmaE subunit was isolated from a
gamma-phage library of the deep-sea piezophilic and psychrophilic bacterium
Shewanella violacea strain DSS12. Structual analysis showed that the gene
organization of the fragment containing S. violacearpoE was the l-aspartate
oxidase-coding gene, rpoE, rseA, rseB and rseC in that order, the same as in the 
case of Photobacterium profundum SS9 and Escherichia coli K-12. The cloned gene, 
576 bp in length, was found to encode a protein consisting of 192 amino acid
residues with a molecular mass of 21,806 Da. Amino acid alignment of the RpoE
protein showed that the functional domains responsible for DNA recognition, DNA
melting, core binding, and RseA interaction were highly conserved. We purified
hexahistidine-fused RpoE protein by constructing an overexpression plasmid.
Core-binding analysis revealed that the cloned RpoE protein has the ability to
bind with core RNA polymerase as a sigma factor.

DOI: 10.1080/10425170400024482 
PMID: 16040350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 1997 Apr;24(2):355-71.

Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor 
activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins.

Missiakas D(1), Mayer MP, Lemaire M, Georgopoulos C, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, LIDSM, Marseille, France.

The sigma(E) (RpoE) transcription factor of Escherichia coli regulates the
expression of genes whose products are devoted to extracytoplasmic activities.
The sigma(E) regulon is induced upon misfolding of proteins in the periplasm or
the outer membrane. Similar to other alternative sigma factors, the activity of
sigma(E) is tightly regulated in E. coli. We have previously shown that sigma(E) 
is positively autoregulated at the transcriptional level. DNA sequencing, coupled
with transcriptional analyses, have shown that sigma(E) is encoded by the first
gene of a four-gene operon. The second gene of this operon, rseA, encodes an
anti-sigma(E) activity. This was demonstrated at both the genetic and biochemical
levels. For example, mutations in rseA constitutively increase sigma(E) activity.
Consistent with this, overproduction of RseA leads to an inhibitory effect on
sigma(E) activity. Topological analysis of RseA suggests the existence of one
transmembrane domain, with the N-terminal part localized in the cytoplasm.
Overproduction of this N-terminal domain alone was shown to inhibit sigma(E)
activity. These observations were confirmed in vitro, because either purified
RseA or only its purified N-terminal domain inhibited transcription from
Esigma(E)-dependent promoters. Furthermore, RseA and sigma(E) co-purify, and can 
be co-immunoprecipitated, and chemically cross-linked. The sigma(E) activity is
further modulated by the products of the remaining genes in this operon, rseB and
rseC. RseB is a periplasmic protein, which negatively regulates sigma(E) activity
and specifically interacts with the C-terminal periplasmic domain of RseA. In
contrast, RseC is an inner membrane protein that positively modulates sigma(E)
activity. Most of these protein-protein interactions were verified in vivo using 
the yeast two-hybrid system.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3601713.x 
PMID: 9159522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplS) AND (trmD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5554-60.

Functional analysis of the ffh-trmD region of the Escherichia coli chromosome by 
using reverse genetics.

Persson BC(1), Bylund GO, Berg DE, Wikström PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

We have analyzed the essentiality or contribution to growth of each of four genes
in the Escherichia coli trmD operon (rpsP, 21K, trmD, and rplS) and of the
flanking genes ffh and 16K by a reverse genetic method. Mutant alleles were
constructed in vitro on plasmids and transferred by recombination to the
corresponding lambda phage clone (lambda 439) and from the phage clone to the E. 
coli chromosome. An ability to obtain recombinants only in cells carrying a
complementing plasmid indicated that the mutated gene was essential, while an
ability to obtain recombinants in plasmid-free cells indicated nonessentiality.
In this way, Ffh, the E. coli homolog to the 54-kDa protein of the signal
recognition particle of mammalian cells, and ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 were 
shown to be essential for viability. A deletion of the second gene, 21K, of the
trmD operon reduced the growth rate of the cells fivefold, indicating that the
wild-type 21-kDa protein is important for viability. A deletion-insertion in the 
same gene resulted in the accumulation of an assembly intermediate of the 50S
ribosomal subunit, as a result of polar effects on the expression of a downstream
gene, rplS, which encodes ribosomal protein L19. This finding suggests that L19, 
previously not considered to be an assembly protein, contributes to the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunits. Strains deleted for the trmD gene, the third gene 
of the operon, encoding the tRNA (m1G37)methyltransferase (or TrmD) showed a
severalfold reduced growth rate. Since such a strain grew much slower than a
strain lacking the tRNA(m(1)G37) methyltransferase activity because of a point
mutation, the TrmD protein might have a second function in the cell. Finally, a
16-kDa protein encoded by the gene located downstream of, and convergently
transcribed to, the trmD operon was found to be nonessential and not to
contribute to growth.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.19.5554-5560.1995 
PMCID: PMC177364
PMID: 7559342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 1994 Jul 22;145(1):147-8.

Sequences of the Serratia marcescens rplS and trmD genes.

Jin S(1), Benedik MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical and Biophysical Sciences, University of Houston, TX 
77204-5934.

The trmD and rplS genes from the Serratia marcescens trmD operon are presented.
These genes are about 85% similar to those of Escherichia coli and encode very
nearly identical proteins. However, there are an additional 22 nt around the
beginning of trmD in S. marcescens which in addition uses a GUG start codon.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90339-5 
PMID: 8045416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Biol. 1989 Aug 20;208(4):575-86.

Differentially expressed trmD ribosomal protein operon of Escherichia coli is
transcribed as a single polycistronic mRNA species.

Byström AS(1), von Gabain A, Björk GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The trmD operon is a four-cistron operon in which the first and fourth genes
encode ribosomal proteins S16 (rpsP) and L19 (rplS), respectively. The second
gene encodes a 21,000 Mr polypeptide of unknown function and the third gene
(trmD) encodes the enzyme tRNA(m1G37)methyltransferase, which catalyzes the
formation of 1-methylguanosine (m1G) next to the 3' end of the anticodon
(position 37) of some tRNAs in Escherichia coli. Here we show under all
regulatory conditions studied, transcription initiates at one unique site, and
the entire operon is transcribed into one polycistronic mRNA. Between the
promoter and the first gene, rpsP, an attenuator-like structure is found (delta G
= -18 kcal; 1 cal = 4.184 J), followed by four uridine residues. This structure
is functional in vitro, and terminates more than two-thirds of the transcripts.
The different parts of the trmD operon mRNA decay at a uniform rate. The
stability of the trmD mRNA is not reduced with decreasing growth rate, which is
in contrast to what has been found for other ribosomal protein mRNAs.
Furthermore, earlier experiments have shown the existence of differential
expression as well as non-co-ordinate regulation within the operon. Our results
are consistent with the regulation of the trmD operon being due to some
mechanism(s) operating at the post-transcriptional level, and do not involve
differential degradation of different mRNA segments, internal promoters or
internal terminators.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90149-6 
PMID: 2478711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. EMBO J. 1983;2(6):899-905.

The nucleotide sequence of an Escherichia coli operon containing genes for the
tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase, the ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 and a 21-K
polypeptide.

Byström AS, Hjalmarsson KJ, Wikström PM, Björk GR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 4.6-kb SalI-EcoRI DNA fragment including the trmD
operon, located at min 56 on the Escherichia coli K-12 chromosome, has been
determined. The trmD operon encodes four polypeptides: ribosomal protein S16
(rpsP), 21-K polypeptide (unknown function), tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase (trmD)
and ribosomal protein L19 (rplS), in that order. In addition, the 4.6-kb DNA
fragment encodes a 48-K and a 16-K polypeptide of unknown functions which are not
part of the trmD operon. The mol. wt. of tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase determined
from the DNA sequence is 28 424. The probable locations of promoter and
terminator of the trmD operon are suggested. The translational start of the trmD 
gene was deduced from the known NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified 
enzyme. The intercistronic regions in the operon vary from 9 to 40 nucleotides,
supporting the earlier conclusion that the four genes are co-transcribed,
starting at the major promoter in front of the rpsP gene. Since it is known that 
ribosomal proteins are present at 8000 molecules/genome and the
tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase at only approximately 80 molecules/genome in a
glucose minimal culture, some powerful regulatory device must exist in this
operon to maintain this non-coordinate expression. The codon usage of the two
ribosomal protein genes is similar to that of other ribosomal protein genes,
i.e., high preference for the most abundant tRNA isoaccepting species. The trmD
gene has a codon usage typical for a protein made in low amount in accordance
with the low number of tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase molecules found in the cell.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1983.tb01519.x 
PMCID: PMC555206
PMID: 6357787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplS) AND (rpsP)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;177(19):5554-60.

Functional analysis of the ffh-trmD region of the Escherichia coli chromosome by 
using reverse genetics.

Persson BC(1), Bylund GO, Berg DE, Wikström PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

We have analyzed the essentiality or contribution to growth of each of four genes
in the Escherichia coli trmD operon (rpsP, 21K, trmD, and rplS) and of the
flanking genes ffh and 16K by a reverse genetic method. Mutant alleles were
constructed in vitro on plasmids and transferred by recombination to the
corresponding lambda phage clone (lambda 439) and from the phage clone to the E. 
coli chromosome. An ability to obtain recombinants only in cells carrying a
complementing plasmid indicated that the mutated gene was essential, while an
ability to obtain recombinants in plasmid-free cells indicated nonessentiality.
In this way, Ffh, the E. coli homolog to the 54-kDa protein of the signal
recognition particle of mammalian cells, and ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 were 
shown to be essential for viability. A deletion of the second gene, 21K, of the
trmD operon reduced the growth rate of the cells fivefold, indicating that the
wild-type 21-kDa protein is important for viability. A deletion-insertion in the 
same gene resulted in the accumulation of an assembly intermediate of the 50S
ribosomal subunit, as a result of polar effects on the expression of a downstream
gene, rplS, which encodes ribosomal protein L19. This finding suggests that L19, 
previously not considered to be an assembly protein, contributes to the assembly 
of the 50S ribosomal subunits. Strains deleted for the trmD gene, the third gene 
of the operon, encoding the tRNA (m1G37)methyltransferase (or TrmD) showed a
severalfold reduced growth rate. Since such a strain grew much slower than a
strain lacking the tRNA(m(1)G37) methyltransferase activity because of a point
mutation, the TrmD protein might have a second function in the cell. Finally, a
16-kDa protein encoded by the gene located downstream of, and convergently
transcribed to, the trmD operon was found to be nonessential and not to
contribute to growth.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.19.5554-5560.1995 
PMCID: PMC177364
PMID: 7559342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Mol Biol. 1989 Aug 20;208(4):575-86.

Differentially expressed trmD ribosomal protein operon of Escherichia coli is
transcribed as a single polycistronic mRNA species.

Byström AS(1), von Gabain A, Björk GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The trmD operon is a four-cistron operon in which the first and fourth genes
encode ribosomal proteins S16 (rpsP) and L19 (rplS), respectively. The second
gene encodes a 21,000 Mr polypeptide of unknown function and the third gene
(trmD) encodes the enzyme tRNA(m1G37)methyltransferase, which catalyzes the
formation of 1-methylguanosine (m1G) next to the 3' end of the anticodon
(position 37) of some tRNAs in Escherichia coli. Here we show under all
regulatory conditions studied, transcription initiates at one unique site, and
the entire operon is transcribed into one polycistronic mRNA. Between the
promoter and the first gene, rpsP, an attenuator-like structure is found (delta G
= -18 kcal; 1 cal = 4.184 J), followed by four uridine residues. This structure
is functional in vitro, and terminates more than two-thirds of the transcripts.
The different parts of the trmD operon mRNA decay at a uniform rate. The
stability of the trmD mRNA is not reduced with decreasing growth rate, which is
in contrast to what has been found for other ribosomal protein mRNAs.
Furthermore, earlier experiments have shown the existence of differential
expression as well as non-co-ordinate regulation within the operon. Our results
are consistent with the regulation of the trmD operon being due to some
mechanism(s) operating at the post-transcriptional level, and do not involve
differential degradation of different mRNA segments, internal promoters or
internal terminators.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90149-6 
PMID: 2478711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. EMBO J. 1983;2(6):899-905.

The nucleotide sequence of an Escherichia coli operon containing genes for the
tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase, the ribosomal proteins S16 and L19 and a 21-K
polypeptide.

Byström AS, Hjalmarsson KJ, Wikström PM, Björk GR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 4.6-kb SalI-EcoRI DNA fragment including the trmD
operon, located at min 56 on the Escherichia coli K-12 chromosome, has been
determined. The trmD operon encodes four polypeptides: ribosomal protein S16
(rpsP), 21-K polypeptide (unknown function), tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase (trmD)
and ribosomal protein L19 (rplS), in that order. In addition, the 4.6-kb DNA
fragment encodes a 48-K and a 16-K polypeptide of unknown functions which are not
part of the trmD operon. The mol. wt. of tRNA(m1G)methyltransferase determined
from the DNA sequence is 28 424. The probable locations of promoter and
terminator of the trmD operon are suggested. The translational start of the trmD 
gene was deduced from the known NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified 
enzyme. The intercistronic regions in the operon vary from 9 to 40 nucleotides,
supporting the earlier conclusion that the four genes are co-transcribed,
starting at the major promoter in front of the rpsP gene. Since it is known that 
ribosomal proteins are present at 8000 molecules/genome and the
tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase at only approximately 80 molecules/genome in a
glucose minimal culture, some powerful regulatory device must exist in this
operon to maintain this non-coordinate expression. The codon usage of the two
ribosomal protein genes is similar to that of other ribosomal protein genes,
i.e., high preference for the most abundant tRNA isoaccepting species. The trmD
gene has a codon usage typical for a protein made in low amount in accordance
with the low number of tRNA-(m1G)methyltransferase molecules found in the cell.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1983.tb01519.x 
PMCID: PMC555206
PMID: 6357787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Gen Genet. 1978 Oct 24;165(3):247-56.

A transducing lambda phage carrying grpE, a bacterial gene necessary for lambda
DNA replication, and two ribosomal protein genes, rpsP (S16) and rplS (L19).

Saito H, Nakamura Y, Uchida H.

A grpE mutation of Escherichia coli K12, which blocks DNA replication of the
phage lambda (Saito and Uchida, 1977), was mapped at 56 min on the standard
genetic map. A transducing lambda phage, lambdagrpE22, carrying the wild type
allele of the grpE gene was constructed in vitro. Structures of lambdagrpE22 and 
its viable deletion derivatives were determined by electron microscopic analyses 
of appropriate heteroduplexes. Proteins coded by the bacterial DNA incorporated
into the transducing phages were detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.
The results showed that the product of the grpE gene is a weakly acidic protein
of molecular weight 24,000. Structural genes for two ribosomal proteins, rplS
(L19) and rpsP (S16) were also shown to be carried by lambdagrpE22.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00332523 
PMID: 368561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((norR) AND (hmp)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nitric Oxide. 2013 Nov 1;34:65-75. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.06.002. Epub 2013 Jun
11.

Nitric oxide reactivities of the two globins of the foodborne pathogen
Campylobacter jejuni: roles in protection from nitrosative stress and analysis of
potential reductants.

Tinajero-Trejo M(1), Vreugdenhil A, Sedelnikova SE, Davidge KS, Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. Electronic address: mbp09mt@sheffield.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: During infection and pathogenesis, Campylobacter, the leading cause
of gastroenteritis, encounters NO and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) derived
from the host. To combat these species, Campylobacter jejuni expresses two
haemoglobins: the single domain haemoglobin (Cgb) detoxifies NO but the role of
the truncated globin (Ctb) is unclear. Confirmation of Cgb activity and more
extensive exploration of Ctb function(s) in vivo are restricted due to
difficulties in expressing proteins in Campylobacter and our lack of
understanding of how the globin haems are re-reduced after ligand reactions.
METHODS: The cgb and ctb genes were cloned under the control of
arabinose-inducible promoters and the globins expressed in an Escherichia coli
mutant lacking the main NO detoxification mechanisms (Hmp and the Nor system
comprising the transcription regulator NorR, the flavorubredoxin and its
reductase (NorVW)); cellular responses under oxidative and nitrosative stress
conditions were assessed. Spectroscopic changes of the Cgb and Ctb haems in
soluble fractions after oxidation by NO were evaluated. Construction of E. coli
nor mutants and a ubiquinone-defective strain allowed the exploration of the
flavorubredoxin reductase and the aerobic respiratory chain as candidates for Cgb
electron donors in E. coli mutants.
RESULTS: Cgb, but not Ctb, complements the NO- and RNS-sensitive phenotype of an 
E. coli hmp mutant in aerobic conditions; however, Cgb fails to protect an hmp
norR mutant in the absence of oxygen. Reduction of Cgb and Ctb in E. coli and C. 
jejuni soluble extracts and turnover after NO oxidation is demonstrated. Finally,
we report a minor role for NorW as a Cgb reductase partner in E. coli but no role
for respiratory electron flux in globin redox cycling.
CONCLUSIONS: The NO detoxification capacity of Cgb is confirmed by heterologous
expression in E. coli. The reducibility of Cgb and Ctb in E. coli and C. jejuni
extracts and the lack of dependence of reduction upon flavorubredoxin reductase
and the respiratory chain in E. coli argue in favor of a non-specific reductase
system.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: We present the most persuasive evidence to date that Cgb,
but not Ctb, confers tolerance to NO and RNS by reaction with NO. Since certain
hypotheses for the mechanism of haem re-reduction in E. coli following the
reaction with NO are not proven, the mechanisms of reduction in C. jejuni now
require challenging experimental evaluation.

2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.06.002 
PMID: 23764490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11146-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200. Epub 2008
Feb 18.

Nitric oxide homeostasis in Salmonella typhimurium: roles of respiratory nitrate 
reductase and flavohemoglobin.

Gilberthorpe NJ(1), Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

Nitric oxide (NO) is generated in biological systems primarily via the activity
of NO synthases and nitrate and nitrite reductases. Here we show that Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium) grown anaerobically with nitrate is
capable of generating polarographically detectable NO after nitrite (NO(2)(-))
addition. NO accumulation is sensitive to the NO scavenger
2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide. Neither an fnr
mutant nor an fnr hmp double mutant produces NO, indicating the involvement in NO
evolution from NO(2)(-) of protein(s) positively regulated by FNR. Contrary to
previous findings in Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that neither the
periplasmic nitrite reductase (NrfA) nor the cytoplasmic nitrite reductase (NirB)
is involved in NO production in S. typhimurium. However, mutant cells lacking the
membrane-bound nitrate reductase, NarGHI, and membranes derived from these cells 
are unable to produce NO, demonstrating that, in wild-type S. typhimurium, this
enzyme is responsible for NO production. Membrane terminal oxidases cannot
account for the NO levels measured. The nitrate reductase inhibitor, azide,
abrogates NO evolution by Salmonella, and production of NO occurs only in the
absence from the assays of nitrate; both features reveal a marked similarity
between the NO-generating activities of this bacterium and plants. Unlike the
situation in E. coli, an S. typhimurium hmp mutant produces NO both aerobically
and anaerobically. Under aerobic conditions, when a functional flavohemoglobin is
present, no NO is detectable. We propose a homeostatic mechanism in S.
typhimurium, in which NO produced from NO(2)(-) by nitrate reductase derepresses 
Hmp expression (via FNR and NsrR) and NorV expression (via NorR) and thus limits 
NO toxicity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200 
PMID: 18285340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS Comput Biol. 2005 Oct;1(5):e55. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Dissimilatory metabolism of nitrogen oxides in bacteria: comparative
reconstruction of transcriptional networks.

Rodionov DA(1), Dubchak IL, Arkin AP, Alm EJ, Gelfand MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia. rodionov@iitp.ru

Bacterial response to nitric oxide (NO) is of major importance since NO is an
obligatory intermediate of the nitrogen cycle. Transcriptional regulation of the 
dissimilatory nitric oxides metabolism in bacteria is diverse and involves
FNR-like transcription factors HcpR, DNR, and NnrR; two-component systems NarXL
and NarQP; NO-responsive activator NorR; and nitrite-sensitive repressor NsrR.
Using comparative genomics approaches, we predict DNA-binding motifs for these
transcriptional factors and describe corresponding regulons in available
bacterial genomes. Within the FNR family of regulators, we observed a correlation
of two specificity-determining amino acids and contacting bases in corresponding 
DNA recognition motif. Highly conserved regulon HcpR for the hybrid cluster
protein and some other redox enzymes is present in diverse anaerobic bacteria,
including Clostridia, Thermotogales, and delta-proteobacteria. NnrR and DNR
control denitrification in alpha- and beta-proteobacteria, respectively.
Sigma-54-dependent NorR regulon found in some gamma- and beta-proteobacteria
contains various enzymes involved in the NO detoxification. Repressor NsrR, which
was previously known to control only nitrite reductase operon in Nitrosomonas
spp., appears to be the master regulator of the nitric oxides' metabolism, not
only in most gamma- and beta-proteobacteria (including well-studied species such 
as Escherichia coli), but also in gram-positive Bacillus and Streptomyces
species. Positional analysis and comparison of regulatory regions of NO
detoxification genes allows us to propose the candidate NsrR-binding motif. The
most conserved member of the predicted NsrR regulon is the NO-detoxifying
flavohemoglobin Hmp. In enterobacteria, the regulon also includes two
nitrite-responsive loci, nipAB (hcp-hcr) and nipC (dnrN), thus confirming the
identity of the effector, i.e. nitrite. The proposed NsrR regulons in Neisseria
and some other species are extended to include denitrification genes. As the
result, we demonstrate considerable interconnection between various
nitrogen-oxides-responsive regulatory systems for the denitrification and NO
detoxification genes and evolutionary plasticity of this transcriptional network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010055 
PMCID: PMC1274295
PMID: 16261196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 21;278(12):10081-6. Epub 2003 Jan 15.

Regulation of the nitric oxide reduction operon (norRVW) in Escherichia coli.
Role of NorR and sigma54 in the nitric oxide stress response.

Gardner AM(1), Gessner CR, Gardner PR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. Anne.Gardner@cchmc.org

Nitric oxide (NO) induces NO-detoxifying enzymes in Escherichia coli suggesting
sensitive mechanisms for coordinate control of NO defense genes in response to NO
stress. Exposure of E. coli to sub-micromolar NO levels under anaerobic
conditions rapidly induced transcription of the NO reductase (NOR) structural
genes, norV and norW, as monitored by lac gene fusions. Disruption of rpoN
(sigma(54)) impaired the NO-mediated induction of norV and norW transcription and
NOR expression, whereas disruption of the upstream regulatory gene, norR,
completely ablated NOR induction. NOR inducibility was restored to NorR null
mutants by expressing NorR in trans. Furthermore, an internal deletion of the
N-terminal domain of NorR activated NOR expression independent of NO exposure.
Neither NorR nor sigma(54) was essential for NO-mediated induction of the NO
dioxygenase (flavohemoglobin) encoded by hmp. However, elevated NOR activity
inhibited NO dioxygenase induction, and, in the presence of dioxygen, NO
dioxygenase inhibited norV induction by NO. The results demonstrate the role of
NorR as a sigma(54)-dependent regulator of norVW expression. A role for the NorR 
N-terminal domain as a transducer or sensor for NO is suggested.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212462200 
PMID: 12529359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((barA) AND (uvrY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mBio. 2022 Feb 1:e0381421. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03814-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Two Polyketides Intertwined in Complex Regulation: Posttranscriptional
CsrA-Mediated Control of Colibactin and Yersiniabactin Synthesis in Escherichia
coli.

Rehm N(1)(2), Wallenstein A(1), Keizers M(1), Homburg S(3), Magistro G(4),
Chagneau CV(5), Klimek H(1), Revelles O(6), Helloin E(5)(7), Putze J(1)(3),
Nougayrède JP(5), Schubert S(8), Oswald E(5), Dobrindt U(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Hygiene, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Interdisziplinäres Zentrum für Klinische Forschung (IZKF) Münster, Universität
Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institut für Molekulare Infektionsbiologie, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.
(4)Urologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Munich, Germany.
(5)IRSD, Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(6)LISBP, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRA, INSA, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(7)ISP, INRA, Université de Tours, UMR 1282, Nouzilly, France.
(8)Max von Pettenkofer-Institut für Hygiene und Medizinische Mikrobiologie,
Medizinische Fakultät, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Bacteria have to process several levels of gene regulation and coordination of
interconnected regulatory networks to ensure the most adequate cellular response 
to specific growth conditions. Especially, expression of complex and costly
fitness and pathogenicity-associated traits is coordinated and tightly regulated 
at multiple levels. We studied the interconnected regulation of the expression of
the colibactin and yersiniabactin polyketide biosynthesis machineries, which are 
encoded by two pathogenicity islands found in many phylogroup B2 Escherichia coli
isolates. Comparative phenotypic and genotypic analyses identified the BarA-UvrY 
two-component system as an important regulatory element involved in colibactin
and yersiniabactin expression. The carbon storage regulator (Csr) system controls
the expression of a wide range of central metabolic and virulence-associated
traits. The availability of CsrA, the key translational regulator of the Csr
system, depends on BarA-UvrY activity. We employed reporter gene fusions to
demonstrate UvrY- and CsrA-dependent expression of the colibactin and
yersiniabactin determinants and confirmed a direct interaction of CsrA with the
5' untranslated leader transcripts of representative genes of the colibactin and 
yersiniabactin operons by RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays. This
posttranscriptional regulation adds an additional level of complexity to control 
mechanisms of polyketide expression, which is also orchestrated at the level of
ferric uptake regulator (Fur)-dependent regulation of transcription and
phosphopantetheinyl transferase-dependent activation of polyketide biosynthesis. 
Our results emphasize the interconnection of iron- and primary
metabolism-responsive regulation of colibactin and yersiniabactin expression by
the fine-tuned action of different regulatory mechanisms in response to variable 
environmental signals as a prerequisite for bacterial adaptability, fitness, and 
pathogenicity in different habitats. IMPORTANCE Secondary metabolite expression
is a widespread strategy among bacteria to improve their fitness in habitats
where they constantly compete for resources with other bacteria. The production
of secondary metabolites is associated with a metabolic and energetic burden.
Colibactin and yersiniabactin are two polyketides, which are expressed in concert
and promote the virulence of different enterobacterial pathogens. To maximize
fitness, they should be expressed only in microenvironments in which they are
required. Accordingly, precise regulation of colibactin and yersiniabactin
expression is crucial. We show that the expression of these two polyketides is
also interconnected via primary metabolism-responsive regulation at the
posttranscriptional level by the CsrA RNA-binding protein. Our findings may help 
to optimize (over-)expression and further functional characterization of the
polyketide colibactin. Additionally, this new aspect of concerted colibactin and 
yersiniabactin expression extends our knowledge of conditions that favor the
expression of these virulence- and fitness-associated factors in different
Enterobacterales members.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03814-21 
PMCID: PMC8805033
PMID: 35100864 


2. J Biol Chem. 2021 Dec;297(6):101383. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101383. Epub 2021
Nov 4.

The Escherichia coli two-component signal sensor BarA binds protonated acetate
via a conserved hydrophobic-binding pocket.

Alvarez AF(1), Rodríguez C(1), González-Chávez R(1), Georgellis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City, México.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City, México. Electronic address:
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The BarA/UvrY two-component signal transduction system is widely conserved in
γ-proteobacteria and provides a link between the metabolic state of the cells and
the Csr posttranscriptional regulatory system. In Escherichia coli, the BarA/UvrY
system responds to the presence of acetate and other short-chain carboxylic acids
by activating transcription of the noncoding RNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester
the RNA-binding protein CsrA, a global regulator of gene expression. However, the
state of the carboxyl group in the acetate molecule, which serves as the BarA
stimulus, and the signal reception site of BarA remain unknown. In this study, we
show that the deletion or replacement of the periplasmic domain of BarA and also 
the substitution of certain hydroxylated and hydrophobic amino acid residues in
this region, result in a sensor kinase that remains unresponsive to its
physiological stimulus, demonstrating that the periplasmic region of BarA
constitutes a functional detector domain. Moreover, we provide evidence that the 
protonated state of acetate or formate serves as the physiological stimulus of
BarA. In addition, modeling of the BarA sensor domain and prediction of the
signal-binding site, by blind molecular docking, revealed a calcium channels and 
chemotaxis receptors domain with a conserved binding pocket, which comprised
uncharged polar and hydrophobic amino acid residues. Based on the comparative
sequence and phylogenetic analyses, we propose that, at least, two types of BarA 
orthologues diverged and evolved separately to acquire distinct signal-binding
properties, illustrating the wide adaptability of the bacterial sensor kinase
proteins.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101383 
PMCID: PMC8639471
PMID: 34743001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


3. J Bacteriol. 2016 Oct 7;198(21):3000-3015. Print 2016 Nov 1.

Circuitry Linking the Catabolite Repression and Csr Global Regulatory Systems of 
Escherichia coli.

Pannuri A(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Zere T(1), McGibbon LC(2), Edwards AN(3),
Georgellis D(4), Babitzke P(2), Romeo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for RNA Molecular
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Institute 
of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, Florida, USA tromeo@ufl.edu.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP) and CsrA are the
principal regulators of the catabolite repression and carbon storage global
regulatory systems, respectively. cAMP-CRP controls the transcription of genes
for carbohydrate metabolism and other processes in response to carbon nutritional
status, while CsrA binds to diverse mRNAs and regulates translation, RNA
stability, and/or transcription elongation. CsrA also binds to the regulatory
small RNAs (sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC, which antagonize its activity. The BarA-UvrY
two-component signal transduction system (TCS) directly activates csrB and csrC
(csrB/C) transcription, while CsrA does so indirectly. We show that cAMP-CRP
inhibits csrB/C transcription without negatively regulating phosphorylated UvrY
(P-UvrY) or CsrA levels. A crp deletion caused an elevation in CsrB/C levels in
the stationary phase of growth and increased the expression of csrB-lacZ and
csrC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, although modest stimulation of CsrB/C turnover
by the crp deletion partially masked the former effects. DNase I footprinting and
other studies demonstrated that cAMP-CRP bound specifically to three sites
located upstream from the csrC promoter, two of which overlapped the P-UvrY
binding site. These two proteins competed for binding at the overlapping sites.
In vitro transcription-translation experiments confirmed direct repression of
csrC-lacZ expression by cAMP-CRP. In contrast, cAMP-CRP effects on csrB
transcription may be mediated indirectly, as it bound nonspecifically to csrB
DNA. In the reciprocal direction, CsrA bound to crp mRNA with high affinity and
specificity and yet exhibited only modest, conditional effects on expression. Our
findings are incorporated into an emerging model for the response of Csr
circuitry to carbon nutritional status.IMPORTANCE: Csr (Rsm) noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) CsrB and CsrC of Escherichia coli use molecular mimicry to sequester the 
RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower-affinity mRNA targets, thus
eliciting major shifts in the bacterial lifestyle. CsrB/C transcription and
turnover are activated by carbon metabolism products (e.g., formate and acetate) 
and by a preferred carbon source (glucose), respectively. We show that cAMP-CRP, 
a mediator of classical catabolite repression, inhibits csrC transcription by
binding to the upstream region of this gene and also inhibits csrB transcription,
apparently indirectly. We propose that glucose availability activates pathways
for both synthesis and turnover of CsrB/C, thus shaping the dynamics of global
signaling in response to the nutritional environment by poising CsrB/C sRNA
levels for rapid response.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00454-16 
PMCID: PMC5055604
PMID: 27551019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Targets and Features of BarA-UvrY (-SirA) Signal Transduction Systems.

Zere TR(1), Vakulskas CA(1), Leng Y(1), Pannuri A(1), Potts AH(1), Dias R(1),
Tang D(1), Kolaczkowski B(1), Georgellis D(2), Ahmer BM(3), Romeo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of
America.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States of America.

The two-component signal transduction system BarA-UvrY of Escherichia coli and
its orthologs globally regulate metabolism, motility, biofilm formation, stress
resistance, virulence of pathogens and quorum sensing by activating the
transcription of genes for regulatory sRNAs, e.g. CsrB and CsrC in E. coli. These
sRNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding protein CsrA (RsmA) away from lower
affinity mRNA targets. In this study, we used ChIP-exo to identify, at single
nucleotide resolution, genomic sites for UvrY (SirA) binding in E. coli and
Salmonella enterica. The csrB and csrC genes were the strongest targets of
crosslinking, which required UvrY phosphorylation by the BarA sensor kinase.
Crosslinking occurred at two sites, an inverted repeat sequence far upstream of
the promoter and a site near the -35 sequence. DNAse I footprinting revealed
specific binding of UvrY in vitro only to the upstream site, indicative of
additional binding requirements and/or indirect binding to the downstream site.
Additional genes, including cspA, encoding the cold-shock RNA-binding protein
CspA, showed weaker crosslinking and modest or negligible regulation by UvrY. We 
conclude that the global effects of UvrY/SirA on gene expression are primarily
mediated by activating csrB and csrC transcription. We also used in vivo
crosslinking and other experimental approaches to reveal new features of
csrB/csrC regulation by the DeaD and SrmB RNA helicases, IHF, ppGpp and DksA.
Finally, the phylogenetic distribution of BarA-UvrY was analyzed and found to be 
uniquely characteristic of γ-Proteobacteria and strongly anti-correlated with
fliW, which encodes a protein that binds to CsrA and antagonizes its activity in 
Bacillus subtilis. We propose that BarA-UvrY and orthologous TCS transcribe sRNA 
antagonists of CsrA throughout the γ-Proteobacteria, but rarely or never perform 
this function in other species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145035 
PMCID: PMC4682653
PMID: 26673755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2015 Mar;197(5):983-91. doi: 10.1128/JB.02325-14. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Effects of the global regulator CsrA on the BarA/UvrY two-component signaling
system.

Camacho MI(1), Alvarez AF(1), Chavez RG(1), Romeo T(2), Merino E(3), Georgellis
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México
dimitris@ifc.unam.mx.

The hybrid sensor kinase BarA and its cognate response regulator UvrY, members of
the two-component signal transduction family, activate transcription of CsrB and 
CsrC noncoding RNAs. These two small RNAs act by sequestering the RNA binding
protein CsrA, which posttranscriptionally regulates translation and/or stability 
of its target mRNAs. Here, we provide evidence that CsrA positively affects,
although indirectly, uvrY expression, at both the transcriptional and
translational levels. We also demonstrate that CsrA is required for properly
switching BarA from its phosphatase to its kinase activity. Thus, the existence
of a feedback loop mechanism that involves the Csr and BarA/UvrY global
regulatory systems is exposed.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02325-14 
PMCID: PMC4325108
PMID: 25535275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Jun;92(5):945-58. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12606. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Global effects of the DEAD-box RNA helicase DeaD (CsdA) on gene expression over a
broad range of temperatures.

Vakulskas CA(1), Pannuri A, Cortés-Selva D, Zere TR, Ahmer BM, Babitzke P, Romeo 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700, USA.

In Escherichia coli, activity of the global regulatory RNA binding protein CsrA
is antagonized by two non-coding sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC, which sequester it away
from its lower affinity mRNA targets. Transcription of csrB/C requires the
BarA-UvrY two component signal transduction system, which responds to short chain
carboxylates. We show that two DEAD-box RNA helicases, DeaD and SrmB, activate
csrB/C expression by different pathways. DeaD facilitates uvrY translation by
counteracting the inhibitory effect of long distance base-pairing between the
uvrY mRNA leader and coding region, while SrmB does not affect UvrY or
UvrY-phosphate levels. Contrary to the prevailing notion that these helicases act
primarily at low temperatures, DeaD and SrmB activated csrB expression over a
wide temperature range. High-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by
cross-linking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP) revealed in vivo interactions of
DeaD with 39 mRNAs, including those of uvrY and 9 other regulatory genes. Studies
on the expression of several of the identified genes revealed regulatory effects 
of DeaD in all cases and diverse temperature response patterns. Our findings
uncover an expanded regulatory role for DeaD, which is mediated through novel
mRNA targets, important global regulators and under physiological conditions that
were considered to be incompatible with its function.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12606 
PMCID: PMC4048959
PMID: 24708042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

BarA-UvrY two-component system regulates virulence of uropathogenic E. coli
CFT073.

Palaniyandi S(1), Mitra A, Herren CD, Lockatell CV, Johnson DE, Zhu X,
Mukhopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United States of America.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), a member of extraintestinal pathogenic E. 
coli, cause ∼80% of community-acquired urinary tract infections (UTI) in humans. 
UPEC initiates its colonization in epithelial cells lining the urinary tract with
a complicated life cycle, replicating and persisting in intracellular and
extracellular niches. Consequently, UPEC causes cystitis and more severe form of 
pyelonephritis. To further understand the virulence characteristics of UPEC, we
investigated the roles of BarA-UvrY two-component system (TCS) in regulating UPEC
virulence. Our results showed that mutation of BarA-UvrY TCS significantly
decreased the virulence of UPEC CFT073, as assessed by mouse urinary tract
infection, chicken embryo killing assay, and cytotoxicity assay on human kidney
and uroepithelial cell lines. Furthermore, mutation of either barA or uvrY gene
reduced the production of hemolysin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proinflammatory
cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) and chemokine (IL-8). The virulence phenotype was
restored similar to that of wild-type by complementation of either barA or uvrY
gene in trans. In addition, we discussed a possible link between the BarA-UvrY
TCS and CsrA in positively and negatively controlling virulence in UPEC. Overall,
this study provides the evidences for BarA-UvrY TCS regulates the virulence of
UPEC CFT073 and may point to mechanisms by which virulence regulations are
observed in different ways may control the long-term survival of UPEC in the
urinary tract.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031348 
PMCID: PMC3283629
PMID: 22363626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023440. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Analysis of the BarA/UvrY two-component system in Shewanella oneidensis MR-1.

Binnenkade L(1), Lassak J, Thormann KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecophysiology, Max-Planck-Institut für Terrestrische
Mikrobiologie, Marburg, Germany.

The BarA/UvrY two-component system is well conserved in species of the
γ-proteobacteria and regulates numerous processes predominantly by controlling
the expression of a subset of noncoding small RNAs. In this study, we identified 
and characterized the BarA/UvrY two-component system in the gammaproteobacterium 
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. Functional interaction of sensor kinase BarA and the 
cognate response regulator UvrY was indicated by in vitro phosphotransfer
studies. The expression of two predicted small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs), CsrB1 and
CsrB2, was dependent on UvrY. Transcriptomic analysis by microarrays revealed
that UvrY is a global regulator and directly or indirectly affects transcript
levels of more than 200 genes in S. oneidensis. Among these are genes encoding
key enzymes of central carbon metabolism such as ackA, aceAB, and pflAB. As
predicted of a signal transduction pathway that controls aspects of central
metabolism, mutants lacking UvrY reach a significantly higher OD than the wild
type during aerobic growth on N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) while under anaerobic
conditions the mutant grew more slowly. A shorter lag phase occurred with lactate
as carbon source. In contrast, significant growth phenotypes were absent in
complex medium. Based on these studies we hypothesize that, in S. oneidensis
MR-1, the global BarA/UvrY/Csr regulatory pathway is involved in central carbon
metabolism processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023440 
PMCID: PMC3171408
PMID: 21931597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Sep;67(17):2897-908. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z. Epub
2010 May 6.

Post-transcriptional global regulation by CsrA in bacteria.

Timmermans J(1), Van Melderen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie Bactérienne, Institut de Biologie et
de Médecine Moléculaires, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 12
rue des Professeurs Jeener et Brachet, 6041, Gosselies, Belgium.

Global regulation allows bacteria to rapidly modulate the expression of a large
variety of unrelated genes in response to environmental changes. Global
regulators act at different levels of gene expression. This review focuses on
CsrA, a post-transcriptional regulator that affects translation of its gene
targets by binding mRNAs. CsrA controls a large variety of physiological
processes such as central carbon metabolism, motility and biofilm formation. The 
activity of CsrA is itself tightly regulated by the CsrB and CsrC small RNAs and 
the BarA-UvrY two-component system.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0381-z 
PMID: 20446015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2010 Apr;192(7):2009-12. doi: 10.1128/JB.01685-09. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

The physiological stimulus for the BarA sensor kinase.

Chavez RG(1), Alvarez AF, Romeo T, Georgellis D.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

The two-component signal transduction system (TCS) BarA/UvrY activates
transcription of CsrB and CsrC noncoding RNAs, which act by sequestering the
RNA-binding global regulatory protein CsrA. Here, we show that the metabolic end 
products formate and acetate provide a physiological stimulus for this TCS and
thus link posttranscriptional regulation by the Csr system to the metabolic state
of the cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01685-09 
PMCID: PMC2838055
PMID: 20118252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gcvA) AND (ampD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 1995 Feb;141 ( Pt 2):419-30.

GcvA, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator protein, activates expression of the 
cloned Citrobacter freundii ampC beta-lactamase gene in Escherichia coli:
cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins.

Everett M(1), Walsh T, Guay G, Bennett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, UK.

Escherichia coli JRG582 is an ampD ampE deletion derivative of strain HfrH and
accordingly it is derepressed for expression of the cloned inducible
beta-lactamase gene of Citrobacter freundii, carried on plasmid pNU305. Following
chemical mutagenesis of JRG582(pNU305) a cefotaxime sensitive mutant was
isolated, CS51(pNU305), which produced low levels of beta-lactamase due to a
mutation in the host chromosome. Two recombinant plasmids containing genomic DNA 
from E. coli HfrH, namely pUB5608 and pUB5611, were isolated as a consequence of 
their ability to restore the beta-lactam resistant phenotype to CS51(pNU305).
This ability was due to direct transcriptional activation of the beta-lactamase
gene, ampC, rather than complementation of the CS51 mutation. Transposon
mutagenesis and subcloning showed that restoration of ampicillin resistance to
CS51(pNU305) was the function of a single gene, which maps at 60.3 min on the E. 
coli chromosome. The gene encodes a 33 kDa protein with significant homology to
members of the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, in particular the
AmpR protein from C. freundii. Homology is especially strong over the N-terminal 
region which includes the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. This gene was shown
to complement the gcvA1 mutation at 60.3 min on the E. coli chromosome, and the
DNA sequence agrees exactly with the published sequence of gcvA which encodes the
transcriptional activator of the inducible glycine cleavage enzyme system. It is 
suggested that GcvA can activate transcription of ampC by binding to the AmpR
binding region upstream of ampC so as to mimic the activated state of AmpR and
hence provides an example of cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins of different
inducible enzyme systems.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-141-2-419 
PMID: 7704273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gcvA) AND (ampE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 1995 Feb;141 ( Pt 2):419-30.

GcvA, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator protein, activates expression of the 
cloned Citrobacter freundii ampC beta-lactamase gene in Escherichia coli:
cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins.

Everett M(1), Walsh T, Guay G, Bennett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, UK.

Escherichia coli JRG582 is an ampD ampE deletion derivative of strain HfrH and
accordingly it is derepressed for expression of the cloned inducible
beta-lactamase gene of Citrobacter freundii, carried on plasmid pNU305. Following
chemical mutagenesis of JRG582(pNU305) a cefotaxime sensitive mutant was
isolated, CS51(pNU305), which produced low levels of beta-lactamase due to a
mutation in the host chromosome. Two recombinant plasmids containing genomic DNA 
from E. coli HfrH, namely pUB5608 and pUB5611, were isolated as a consequence of 
their ability to restore the beta-lactam resistant phenotype to CS51(pNU305).
This ability was due to direct transcriptional activation of the beta-lactamase
gene, ampC, rather than complementation of the CS51 mutation. Transposon
mutagenesis and subcloning showed that restoration of ampicillin resistance to
CS51(pNU305) was the function of a single gene, which maps at 60.3 min on the E. 
coli chromosome. The gene encodes a 33 kDa protein with significant homology to
members of the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, in particular the
AmpR protein from C. freundii. Homology is especially strong over the N-terminal 
region which includes the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. This gene was shown
to complement the gcvA1 mutation at 60.3 min on the E. coli chromosome, and the
DNA sequence agrees exactly with the published sequence of gcvA which encodes the
transcriptional activator of the inducible glycine cleavage enzyme system. It is 
suggested that GcvA can activate transcription of ampC by binding to the AmpR
binding region upstream of ampC so as to mimic the activated state of AmpR and
hence provides an example of cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins of different
inducible enzyme systems.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-141-2-419 
PMID: 7704273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gcvA) AND (ampC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 1995 Feb;141 ( Pt 2):419-30.

GcvA, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator protein, activates expression of the 
cloned Citrobacter freundii ampC beta-lactamase gene in Escherichia coli:
cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins.

Everett M(1), Walsh T, Guay G, Bennett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, UK.

Escherichia coli JRG582 is an ampD ampE deletion derivative of strain HfrH and
accordingly it is derepressed for expression of the cloned inducible
beta-lactamase gene of Citrobacter freundii, carried on plasmid pNU305. Following
chemical mutagenesis of JRG582(pNU305) a cefotaxime sensitive mutant was
isolated, CS51(pNU305), which produced low levels of beta-lactamase due to a
mutation in the host chromosome. Two recombinant plasmids containing genomic DNA 
from E. coli HfrH, namely pUB5608 and pUB5611, were isolated as a consequence of 
their ability to restore the beta-lactam resistant phenotype to CS51(pNU305).
This ability was due to direct transcriptional activation of the beta-lactamase
gene, ampC, rather than complementation of the CS51 mutation. Transposon
mutagenesis and subcloning showed that restoration of ampicillin resistance to
CS51(pNU305) was the function of a single gene, which maps at 60.3 min on the E. 
coli chromosome. The gene encodes a 33 kDa protein with significant homology to
members of the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, in particular the
AmpR protein from C. freundii. Homology is especially strong over the N-terminal 
region which includes the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. This gene was shown
to complement the gcvA1 mutation at 60.3 min on the E. coli chromosome, and the
DNA sequence agrees exactly with the published sequence of gcvA which encodes the
transcriptional activator of the inducible glycine cleavage enzyme system. It is 
suggested that GcvA can activate transcription of ampC by binding to the AmpR
binding region upstream of ampC so as to mimic the activated state of AmpR and
hence provides an example of cross-talk between DNA-binding proteins of different
inducible enzyme systems.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-141-2-419 
PMID: 7704273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (purE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 2001 Jun;147(Pt 6):1565-1573. doi:
10.1099/00221287-147-6-1565.

Genetic localization and regulation of the maltose phosphorylase gene, malP, in
Lactococcus lactis.

Nilsson U(1), Rådström P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Microbiology, Centre for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lund
Institute of Technology, Lund University, PO Box 124, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden1.

Maltose phosphorylase (MP) from Lactococcus lactis was purified and the
corresponding gene was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The isoelectric 
point of the pure enzyme was determined to be 7.0. According to zymogram analysis
and SDS-PAGE, the native MP was shown to be a monomeric enzyme with a molecular
mass of 75 kDa. A polyclonal antiserum was produced to assess the regulation of
the gene encoding MP in LC: lactis. According to immunoblot analysis, synthesis
of the enzyme was markedly repressed by both glucose and lactose in the growth
medium. When the lactococci were cultivated in the presence of other sugars,
including maltose, trehalose or galactose, there was a pronounced expression of
the MP gene. In addition, when the cells were grown in media without any added
sugar, there was also pronounced expression of the enzyme, according to
immunoblot analysis and specific activity data. These results indicated that no
particular sugar specifically induces the gene encoding MP. However, an effect of
glucose on MP expression was demonstrated by performing fermentations in the
presence of both maltose and glucose. When glucose was added to maltose-grown
lactococci in the mid-exponential growth phase, both the specific activity and
amount of MP per millilitre of cell extract decreased rapidly. The genetic locus 
for the MP gene was found to be in the vicinity of the region encoding a possible
regulator belonging to the LacI-GalR family of transcriptional regulators.
Furthermore, this genetic location was separated from the previously
characterized maltose-inducible and glucose-repressible beta-phosphoglucomutase
(beta-PGM) gene. The different genetic loci for the genes encoding MP and
beta-PGM explains the different gene regulation behaviour.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-147-6-1565 
PMID: 11390687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (purF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biochemistry. 2002 Jan 15;41(2):511-20.

Role of residue 147 in the gene regulatory function of the Escherichia coli
purine repressor.

Huffman JL(1), Lu F, Zalkin H, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

The crystal structures of corepressor-bound and free Escherichia coli purine
repressor (PurR) have delineated the roles of several residues in corepressor
binding and specificity and the intramolecular signal transduction (allosterism) 
of this LacI/GalR family member. From these structures, residue W147 was
implicated as a key component of the allosteric response, but in many members of 
the LacI/GalR family, position 147 is occupied by an arginine. To understand the 
role of this tryptophan at position 147, three proteins, substituted by
phenylalanine (W147F), alanine (W147A), or arginine (W147R), were constructed and
characterized in vivo and in vitro, and their structures were determined. W147F
displays a decreased affinity for corepressor and is a poor repressor in vivo.
W147A and W147R, on the other hand, are super repressors and bind corepressor
13.6 and 7.9 times more tightly, respectively, than wild-type. Each mutant
PurR-hypoxanthine-purF operator holo complex crystallizes isomorphously to
wild-type. Whereas the apo corepressor binding domain (CBD) of W147F crystallizes
under those conditions used for the wild-type protein, neither the apo CBD of
W147R nor W147A crystallizes, although screened extensively for new crystal
forms. Structures of the holo repressor mutants have been solved to resolutions
between 2.5 and 2.9 A, and the structure of the apo CBD of W147F has been solved 
to 2.4 A resolution. These structures provide insight into the altered
biochemical properties and physiological functions of these mutants, which appear
to depend on the sometimes subtle preference for one conformation (apo vs holo)
over the other.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0156660 
PMID: 11781089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Mol Biol. 1999 Aug 13;291(2):347-61.

The role of lysine 55 in determining the specificity of the purine repressor for 
its operators through minor groove interactions.

Glasfeld A(1), Koehler AN, Schumacher MA, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR, 97201-3098, USA.

The interaction of the dimeric Escherichia coli purine repressor (PurR) with its 
cognate sequences leads to a 45 degrees to 50 degrees kink at a central CpG base 
step towards the major groove, as dyad-related leucine side-chains interdigitate 
between these bases from the minor groove. The resulting broadening of the minor 
groove increases the accessibility of the six central base-pairs towards minor
groove interactions with residues from PurR. It has been shown that lysine 55 of 
PurR makes a direct contact with the adenine base (Ade8) directly 5' to the
central CpG base-pair step in the high-affinity purF operator sequence. We have
investigated the importance of this interaction in the specificity and affinity
of wild-type PurR (WT) for its operators and we have studied a mutant of PurR in 
which Lys55 is replaced with alanine (K55A). Complexes of WT and K55A with duplex
DNA containing pur operator sequences varied at position 8 were investigated
crystallographically, and binding studies were performed using fluorescence
anisotropy. The structures of the protein-DNA complexes reveal a relatively
unperturbed global conformation regardless of the identity of the base-pair at
position 8 or residue 55. In all structures the combination of higher resolution 
and a palindromic purF operator site allowed several new PurR.DNA interactions to
be observed, including contacts by Thr15, Thr16 and His20. The side-chain of
Lys55 makes productive, though varying, interactions with the adenine, thymine or
cytosine base at position 8 that result in equilibrium dissociation constants of 
2.6 nM, 10 nM and 35 nM, respectively. However, the bulk of the lysine side-chain
apparently blocks high-affinity binding of operators with guanine at position 8
(Kd620 nM). Also, the high-affinity binding conformation appears blocked, as
crystals of WT bound to DNA with guanine at position 8 could not be grown. In
complexes containing K55A, the alanine side-chain is too far removed to engage in
van der Waals interactions with the operator, and, with the loss of the general
electrostatic interaction between the phosphate backbone and the ammonium group
of lysine, K55A binds each operator weakly. However, the mutation leads to a swap
of specificity of PurR for the base at position 8, with K55A exhibiting a twofold
preference for guanine over adenine. In addition to defining the role of Lys55 in
PurR minor groove binding, these studies provide structural insight into the
minor groove binding specificities of other LacI/GalR family members that have
either alanine (e.g. LacI, GalR, CcpA) or a basic residue (e.g. RafR, ScrR, RbtR)
at the comparable position.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2946 
PMID: 10438625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 25;263(36):19653-61.

Escherichia coli gene purR encoding a repressor protein for purine nucleotide
synthesis. Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and interaction with the purF operator.

Rolfes RJ(1), Zalkin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.

The Escherichia coli gene purR, encoding a repressor protein, was cloned by
complementation of a purR mutation. Gene purR on a multicopy plasmid repressed
expression of purF and purF-lacZ and reduced the growth rate of host cells by
limiting the rate of de novo purine nucleotide synthesis. The level of a
1.3-kilobase purR mRNA was higher in cells grown with excess adenine, suggesting 
that synthesis of the repressor may be regulated. The chromosomal locus of purR
was mapped to coordinate 1755-kb on the E. coli restriction map (Kohara, Y.,
Akiyama, K., and Isono, K. (1987) Cell 50, 495-508). Pur repressor bound
specifically to purF operator DNA as determined by gel retardation and DNase I
footprinting assays. The amino acid sequence of Pur repressor was derived from
the nucleotide sequence. Pur repressor subunit contains 341 amino acids and has a
calculated Mr of 38,179. Pur repressor is 31-35% identical with the galR and cytR
repressors and 26% identical with the lacI repressor. These four repressors are
likely homologous. Amino acid sequence similarity is greatest in an
amino-terminal region presumed to contain a DNA-binding domain. A similarity is
also noted in the operator sites for these repressors.


PMID: 3058704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((galR) AND (ascG)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Biol Evol. 1992 Jul;9(4):688-706.

Nucleotide sequence, function, activation, and evolution of the cryptic asc
operon of Escherichia coli K12.

Hall BG(1), Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Rochester, New York 14627.

The cryptic asc (previous called "SAC") operon of Escherichia coli K12 has been
completely sequenced. It encodes a repressor (ascG); a PTS enzyme IIasc for the
transport of arbutin, salicin, and cellobiose (ascF); and a
phospho-beta-glucosidase that hydrolyzes the sugars which are phosphorylated
during transport (ascB). ascG and ascFB are transcribed from divergent promoters.
The cryptic operon is activated by the insertion of IS186 into the ascG
(repressor) gene. The ascFB genes are paralogous to the cryptic bglFB genes, and 
ascG is paralogous to galR. The duplications that gave rise to these paralogous
genes are estimated to have occurred approximately 320 Mya, a time that predates 
the divergence of E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040753 
PMID: 1630307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseB) AND (mdaB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Feb 23;9:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42.

Genome-wide analysis of the PreA/PreB (QseB/QseC) regulon of Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium.

Merighi M(1), Septer AN, Carroll-Portillo A, Bhatiya A, Porwollik S, McClelland
M, Gunn JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. gunn.43@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: The Salmonella PreA/PreB two-component system (TCS) is an ortholog of
the QseBC TCS of Escherichia coli. In both Salmonella and E. coli, this system
has been shown to affect motility and virulence in response to quorum-sensing and
hormonal signals, and to affect the transcription of the Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) pmrAB operon, which encodes an important
virulence-associated TCS.
RESULTS: To determine the PreA/PreB regulon in S. Typhimurium, we performed DNA
microarrays comparing the wild type strain and various preA and/or preB mutants
in the presence of ectopically expressed preA (qseB). These data confirmed our
previous findings of the negative effect of PreB on PreA gene regulation and
identified candidate PreA-regulated genes. A proportion of the activated loci
were previously identified as PmrA-activated genes (yibD, pmrAB, cptA, etc.) or
were genes located in the local region around preA, including the preAB operon.
The transcriptional units were defined in this local region by RT-PCR, suggesting
three PreA activated operons composed of preA-preB, mdaB-ygiN, and ygiW-STM3175. 
Several putative virulence-related phenotypes were examined for preAB mutants,
resulting in the observation of a host cell invasion and slight virulence defect 
of a preAB mutant. Contrary to previous reports on this TCS, we were unable to
show a PreA/PreB-dependent effect of the quorum-sensing signal AI-2 or of
epinephrine on S. Typhimurium with regard to bacterial motility.
CONCLUSION: This work further characterizes this unorthadox OmpR/EnvZ class TCS
and provides novel candidate regulated genes for further study. This first
in-depth study of the PreA/PreB regulatory system phenotypes and regulation
suggests significant comparative differences to the reported function of the
orthologous QseB/QseC in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42 
PMCID: PMC2653508
PMID: 19236707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseB) AND (ygiN)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Feb 23;9:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42.

Genome-wide analysis of the PreA/PreB (QseB/QseC) regulon of Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium.

Merighi M(1), Septer AN, Carroll-Portillo A, Bhatiya A, Porwollik S, McClelland
M, Gunn JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. gunn.43@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: The Salmonella PreA/PreB two-component system (TCS) is an ortholog of
the QseBC TCS of Escherichia coli. In both Salmonella and E. coli, this system
has been shown to affect motility and virulence in response to quorum-sensing and
hormonal signals, and to affect the transcription of the Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) pmrAB operon, which encodes an important
virulence-associated TCS.
RESULTS: To determine the PreA/PreB regulon in S. Typhimurium, we performed DNA
microarrays comparing the wild type strain and various preA and/or preB mutants
in the presence of ectopically expressed preA (qseB). These data confirmed our
previous findings of the negative effect of PreB on PreA gene regulation and
identified candidate PreA-regulated genes. A proportion of the activated loci
were previously identified as PmrA-activated genes (yibD, pmrAB, cptA, etc.) or
were genes located in the local region around preA, including the preAB operon.
The transcriptional units were defined in this local region by RT-PCR, suggesting
three PreA activated operons composed of preA-preB, mdaB-ygiN, and ygiW-STM3175. 
Several putative virulence-related phenotypes were examined for preAB mutants,
resulting in the observation of a host cell invasion and slight virulence defect 
of a preAB mutant. Contrary to previous reports on this TCS, we were unable to
show a PreA/PreB-dependent effect of the quorum-sensing signal AI-2 or of
epinephrine on S. Typhimurium with regard to bacterial motility.
CONCLUSION: This work further characterizes this unorthadox OmpR/EnvZ class TCS
and provides novel candidate regulated genes for further study. This first
in-depth study of the PreA/PreB regulatory system phenotypes and regulation
suggests significant comparative differences to the reported function of the
orthologous QseB/QseC in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-42 
PMCID: PMC2653508
PMID: 19236707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((qseC) AND (qseB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Apr 6;13:817494. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.817494.
eCollection 2022.

The Role of the Two-Component QseBC Signaling System in Biofilm Formation and
Virulence of Hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC43816.

Lv J(1), Zhu J(1), Wang T(2), Xie X(1), Wang T(1), Zhu Z(1), Chen L(3)(4), Zhong 
F(5), Du H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Suzhou Science and Technology Town
Hospital, Suzhou, China.
(3)Hackensack Meridian Health Center for Discovery and Innovation, Nutley, NJ,
United States.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine,
Nutley, NJ, United States.
(5)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China.

Hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae (hvKP) is an evolving infectious pathogen
associated with high mortality. The convergence of hypervirulence and multidrug
resistance further challenges the clinical treatment options for K. pneumoniae
infections. The QseBC two-component system (TCS) is a component of quorum-sensing
regulatory cascade and functions as a global regulator of biofilm growth,
bacterial motility, and virulence in Escherichia coli. However, the functional
mechanisms of QseBC in hvKP have not been reported, and we aim to examine the
role of QseBC in regulating virulence in hvKP strain ATCC43816. The CRISPR-Cas9
system was used to construct qseB, qseC, and qseBC knockout in ATCC43816. No
significant alterations in the growth and antibiotic susceptibility were detected
between wild-type and mutants. The deletion of qseC led to an increase of biofilm
formation, resistance to serum killing, and high mortality in the G. mellonella
model. RNAseq differential gene expression analysis exhibited that
gene-associated biofilm formation (glgC, glgP, glgA, gcvA, bcsA, ydaM, paaF,
ptsG), bacterial type VI secretion system (virB4, virB6, virB10, vgrG, hcp), and 
biosynthesis of siderophore (entC, entD, entE) were significantly upregulated in 
comparison with the wild-type control. In addition, qseB, ygiW (encode OB-family 
protein), and AraC family transcriptional regulator IT767_23090 genes showed
highest expressions in the absence of QseC, which might be related to increased
virulence. The study provided new insights into the functional importance of
QseBC in regulating the virulence of hvKP.

Copyright © 2022 Lv, Zhu, Wang, Xie, Wang, Zhu, Chen, Zhong and Du.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.817494 
PMCID: PMC9019566
PMID: 35464966 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


2. Gene. 2021 Mar 20;773:145374. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374. Epub 2020 Dec 23.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling is required for correct timing of
replication initiation and cell motility.

Wu D(1), Baigalmaa L(1), Yao Y(2), Li G(1), Su M(3), Fan L(4), Morigen(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China; Department of Neurology, Inner Mongolia People's Hospital, Hohhot 010017, 
China.
(3)Medical College, Dalian University, Dalian 116622, China. Electronic address: 
suming50@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: lifei.fan@imu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation & Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010070,
China. Electronic address: morigenm@hotmail.com.

The Escherichia coli QseB/QseC signaling regulates expressions of more than 50
genes encoding flagellar proteins and proteins associated with virulence. Here we
found that absence of the QseB/QseC signaling led to an early initiation of
chromosomal replication and higher concentration of DnaA which is initiator for
replication. The upstream region of dnaA promoter contains three potential QseB
binding sites and absence of these binding sites increased transcription of the
dnaA gene in wild-type cells but not in the cells lacking the qseB/qseC genes,
showing that the QseB/QseC signaling regulates dnaA expression through the QseB
binding sites. Also increased cell motility but neither cell size nor growth rate
in ΔqseBC and ΔqseB cells was observed and these effects were reversed by ectopic
expression of QseBC. Further, it was found that QseB interacted with the DnaK
chaperone and FtsZ cell division protein in vivo, and absence of DnaK or partial 
inactivation of FtsZ decreased cell motility. Thus, we conclude that the
QseB/QseC signaling modulates timing of replication initiation by regulating
expression of DnaA, coordinates cell motility with cell division through
interacting with the DnaK and FtsZ protein.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145374 
PMID: 33359126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Feb;115(2):191-207. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14609. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

A genetic screen to identify factors affected by undecaprenyl phosphate recycling
uncovers novel connections to morphogenesis in Escherichia coli.

Jorgenson MA(1), Bryant JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.

Undecaprenyl phosphate (Und-P) is an essential lipid carrier that ferries cell
wall intermediates across the cytoplasmic membrane in bacteria. Und-P is
generated by dephosphorylating undecaprenyl pyrophosphate (Und-PP). In
Escherichia coli, BacA, PgpB, YbjG, and LpxT dephosphorylate Und-PP and are
conditionally essential. To identify vulnerabilities that arise when Und-P
metabolism is defective, we developed a genetic screen for synthetic interactions
which, in combination with ΔybjG ΔlpxT ΔbacA, are lethal or reduce fitness. The
screen uncovered novel connections to cell division, DNA replication/repair,
signal transduction, and glutathione metabolism. Further analysis revealed
several new morphogenes; loss of one of these, qseC, caused cells to enlarge and 
lyse. QseC is the sensor kinase component of the QseBC two-component system. Loss
of QseC causes overactivation of the QseB response regulator by PmrB
cross-phosphorylation. Here, we show that deleting qseB completely reverses the
shape defect of ΔqseC cells, as does overexpressing rprA (a small RNA).
Surprisingly, deleting pmrB only partially suppressed qseC-related shape defects.
Thus, QseB is activated by multiple factors in QseC's absence and prior functions
ascribed to QseBC may originate from cell wall defects. Altogether, our findings 
provide a framework for identifying new determinants of cell integrity that could
be targeted in future therapies.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14609 
PMID: 32979869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 23;10(1):15479. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8.

Complete genome sequence of fish-pathogenic Aeromonas hydrophila HX-3 and a
comparative analysis: insights into virulence factors and quorum sensing.

Jin L(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Yang W(3)(4), Qiao Z(3)(4), Zhang X(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China.
(2)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China.
(3)College of Food and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo,
315211, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Protein Food Deep Processing Technology of Zhejiang
Province, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(5)Marine Fishery Research Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, 316021,
China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.
(6)Zhoushan Fishery Environments and Aquatic Products Quality Monitoring Center
of Ministry of Agriculture China, Zhoushan, 316021, China. zhangxj_hys@126.com.

The gram-negative, aerobic, rod-shaped bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, the
causative agent of motile aeromonad septicaemia, has attracted increasing
attention due to its high pathogenicity. Here, we constructed the complete genome
sequence of a virulent strain, A. hydrophila HX-3 isolated from Pseudosciaena
crocea and performed comparative genomics to investigate its virulence factors
and quorum sensing features in comparison with those of other Aeromonas isolates.
HX-3 has a circular chromosome of 4,941,513 bp with a 61.0% G + C content
encoding 4483 genes, including 4318 protein-coding genes, and 31 rRNA, 127 tRNA
and 7 ncRNA operons. Seventy interspersed repeat and 153 tandem repeat sequences,
7 transposons, 8 clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, and
39 genomic islands were predicted in the A. hydrophila HX-3 genome. Phylogeny and
pan-genome were also analyzed herein to confirm the evolutionary relationships on
the basis of comparisons with other fully sequenced Aeromonas genomes. In
addition, the assembled HX-3 genome was successfully annotated against the
Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins database (76.03%), Gene Ontology
database (18.13%), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome pathway database
(59.68%). Two-component regulatory systems in the HX-3 genome and virulence
factors profiles through comparative analysis were predicted, providing insights 
into pathogenicity. A large number of genes related to the AHL-type 1 (ahyI,
ahyR), LuxS-type 2 (luxS, pfs, metEHK, litR, luxOQU) and QseBC-type 3 (qseB,
qseC) autoinducer systems were also identified. As a result of the expression of 
the ahyI gene in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3), combined UPLC-MS/MS profiling led
to the identification of several new N-acyl-homoserine lactone compounds
synthesized by AhyI. This genomic analysis determined the comprehensive QS
systems of A. hydrophila, which might provide novel information regarding the
mechanisms of virulence signatures correlated with QS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72484-8 
PMCID: PMC7512022
PMID: 32968153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2020 Sep 16;54(5):888-898. doi: 10.33594/000000276.

In Silico and in Vitro Study of Trace Amines (TA) and Dopamine (DOP) Interaction 
with Human Alpha 1-Adrenergic Receptor and the Bacterial Adrenergic Receptor
QseC.

Luqman A(1)(2)(3), Kharisma VD(3), Ruiz RA(1), Götz F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Biology Department, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Generasi Biologi Indonesia (Genbinesia) Foundation, Gresik, Indonesia.
(4)Microbial Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection
Medicine Tübingen (IMIT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
friedrich.goetz@uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Trace amines (TA) are small organic compounds that have
neuromodulator activity due to their interaction with some neuron-related
receptors, such as trace amine associated receptors (TAARs), α2-adrenergic
receptor (α2-AR) and ß-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR). However, there is little
information on whether TA and dopamine (DOP) can interact with other adrenergic
receptors (ARs) such as the mammalian α1-AR and the bacterial counterpart QseC,
which is involved in quorum sensing of some Gram-negative pathogens. The aim of
this study was to investigate the interaction of TA and DOP with α1-AR and QseC.
METHODS: We performed an in silico study using 3D structure from SWISS MODEL and 
analyzed the protein interaction via molecular docking using PyMol, PoseView and 
PyRX 8.0. For the in vitro study, we investigated the QseC kinase activity by
measuring the remaining ATP in a reaction containing QseC-enriched membrane
incubated together with purified QseB and EPI, TA, DOP, or PTL respectively. We
also measured the intracellular Ca++ levels, which represents the α1-AR
activation, in LNCAP (pancreatic cell line) cells treated with EPI, TA, DOP and
PTL respectively using a fluorescence-based assay. The LNCAP cell proliferation
was measured using an MTT-based assay.
RESULTS: Our in silico analysis revealed that TAs and DOP have high binding
affinity to the human α1-AR and the bacterial adrenergic receptor (QseC),
comparable to epinephrine (EPI). Both are membrane-bound kinases. Experimental
studies with pancreatic cell line (LNCAP) showed that the TAs and DOP act as
α1-AR antagonist by counteracting the effect of EPI. In the presence of EPI, TA
and DOP trigger an increase of the intracellular Ca++ levels in the LNCAP cells
leading to an inhibition of cell proliferation. Although in silico data suggest
an interaction of TA and DOP with QseC, they do not inhibit the kinase activity
of QseC, a histidine kinase receptor involved in quorum sensing which is also
sensitive to EPI.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that the TAs and DOP act as α1-AR antagonist but no 
effect was observed for QseC.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000276 
PMID: 32930525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.


6. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2020 Nov;17(11):720-727. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810. Epub
2020 Aug 19.

Emergence of Transferable mcr-9 Gene-Carrying Colistin-Resistant Salmonella
enterica Dessau ST14 Isolated from Retail Chicken Meat in Korea.

Cha MH(1)(2), Woo GJ(1), Lee W(2), Kim SH(2), Woo JH(2), Kim J(3), Ryu JG(4),
Kwak HS(2), Chi YM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Safety and Evaluation, Department of Biotechnology, Korea
University Graduate School, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Food Microbiology, National Institute of Food and Drug Safety
Evaluation, Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Bacterial Diseases, Center for Laboratory Control of Infectious
Diseases, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongju, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Microbial Safety Team, National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural
Development Administration, Wanju, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Colistin is an important antibiotic currently used to manage infections caused by
multidrug-resistant pathogens in both humans and livestock animals. A new mobile 
colistin-resistance (mcr-9) gene was recently discovered; this discovery
highlighted the need for rigorous monitoring of bacterial resistance against
colistin. Salmonella is one of the major pathogens responsible for foodborne
illnesses; however, there is minimal information regarding the presence of mcr
genes in foodborne Salmonella strains. The aim of this study was to investigate
the presence of mcr genes among 178 Salmonella strains isolated from chicken meat
in Korea. Antimicrobial susceptibility was measured using the broth microdilution
method. Bioinformatics characterization of colistin-resistant strains and genetic
environment of the mcr-9 gene were analyzed using next-generation sequencing.
Transferability of the mcr-9 carrying colistin-resistant Salmonella strain was
tested using broth-mating conjugation. Thirteen of the 178 Salmonella isolates
showed colistin resistance, but only one strain, Salmonella Dessau ST14
(KUFSE-SAL043) from a traditional chicken market in Korea, carried an mcr family 
gene, mcr-9. This strain also carried other acquired antimicrobial resistance
genes such as blaTEM-1B, qnrS1, and aac(6')-Iaa. Only the IncX1 plasmid replicon 
type was detected in this strain. In the strain KUFSE-SAL043, the mcr-9 gene was 
located between two insertion sequences, IS903B and IS26, followed by the
downstream regulatory genes qseB-like and qseC-like, which were located between
IS1R and ΔIS1R. Conjugation tests revealed that the mcr-9 gene was successfully
transferred to Escherichia coli J53 at a mean frequency of 2.03 × 10-7. This is
the first report of a transferable mcr-9 gene in Salmonella isolated from chicken
meat in Korea, highlighting the possibility of transfer of colistin resistance.
Therefore, the wide use of colistin should be reconsidered, and a One Health
perspective should be adopted to monitor the antimicrobial resistance of
Enterobacteriaceae strains in humans, livestock, and the environment.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2020.2810 
PMCID: PMC7698652
PMID: 32830987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jul;81:104273. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104273. Epub
2020 Mar 4.

Plasmid carrying mcr-9 from an extensively drug-resistant NDM-1-producing
Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. quasipneumoniae clinical isolate.

Faccone D(1), Martino F(2), Albornoz E(2), Gomez S(1), Corso A(2), Petroni A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Godoy Cruz 2290 (C1425FQB),
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Servicio Antimicrobianos, Departamento de Bacteriología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán", Av. Vélez Sarsfield 563
(C1282AFF), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
apetroni@anlis.gob.ar.

The extensively drug-resistant NDM-1-producing Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. 
quasipneumoniae M17277 (Kqsq-M17277) was only susceptible to colistin and
fosfomycin. Whole genome sequencing of Kqsq-M17277 was performed through Illumina
(short reads) and Oxford Nanopore Technologies (long reads). Hybrid assembly of
short and long reads rendered circular contigs of the Kqsq-M17277 chromosome and 
three plasmids of 477,340 (p17277A_477), 138,998 (p17277C_138, which harbored
blaNDM-1) and 123,307 bp (p17277B_123). In silico analysis showed that
p17277A_477 was not previously described, belonged to the IncHI2 incompatibility 
group and contained 51 complete or partial (≥300 bp) insertion sequences and Tn3 
family transposons, which encompassed, as a whole, 14% of the p17277A_477
sequence. In silico search for antimicrobial resistance genes revealed that
p17277A_477 harbored the recently described plasmid-encoded mcr-9 gene (colistin 
resistance), besides other resistance genes. This is the first worldwide report
of a K. quasipneumoniae harboring mcr-9 and blaNDM-1 and the first report of
mcr-9 in Latin America. This gene was embedded in a genetic structure, i.e.,
IS903B-like/mcr-9/wbuC/IS26, that was found in 71% of the mcr-9-harboring
sequences of the NCBI Nucleotide Collection database. The qseC and qseB genes
involved in mcr-9 expression were not found in Kqsq-M17277, which could explain
its colistin susceptibility. Fifteen additional resistance genes were detected in
p17277A_477. Ten of them [aac(6')-IIc, aadA2, aph(3')-Ia, blaDHA-1, dfrA12,
ereA2, mphA, qnrB4, sul1 and tet(D)] were found clustered within a 44,907-bp-long
array of IS26-bounded resistance genes. The plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance
gene qnrB4 was located in a complex class 1 integron within this IS26-bounded
resistance gene cluster. p17277A_477 was self-transferable by conjugation to
Escherichia coli J53, azide-resistant. The Tra1 and Tra2 conjugative transfer
regions of the IncHI2 plasmid R478 were found by in silico search. p17277A_477 is
a complex plasmid that provides a large baggage of both resistance genes and
genetic resources for plasmid rearrangements and additional resistance gene
acquisition.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104273 
PMID: 32145334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.


8. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Mar;20:285-289. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.08.007.
Epub 2019 Sep 5.

A link between the newly described colistin resistance gene mcr-9 and clinical
Enterobacteriaceae isolates carrying blaSHV-12 from horses in Sweden.

Börjesson S(1), Greko C(2), Myrenås M(2), Landén A(2), Nilsson O(2), Pedersen
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Antimicrobial Strategies, National Veterinary 
Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden; Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
stefan.borjesson@liu.se.
(2)Department of Animal Health and Antimicrobial Strategies, National Veterinary 
Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the occurrence of the newly 
described transferable colistin resistance gene mcr-9 in extended-spectrum
β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing clinical Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses in 
Sweden.
METHODS: A total of 56 whole-genome sequenced ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae
isolates from horses were subjected to in silico detection of antimicrobial
resistance genes and identification of plasmid replicons types. The colistin
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for mcr-positive isolates was determined
by broth microdilution. Relatedness between Enterobacteriaceae carrying mcr genes
was determined by multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and core genome MLST.
RESULTS: Thirty ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses were
positive for the colistin resistance gene mcr-9. These isolates included
Enterobacter cloacae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella oxytoca and Citrobacter
freundii and belonged to diverse MLST sequence types within each species. Two of 
the mcr-9-containing isolates originated from the same horse. All mcr-9-positive 
isolates had colistin MICs below or equal to the EUCAST epidemiological cut-off
value of 2 mg/L and were negative for the two potential regulatory genes
qseB-like and qseC-like for mcr-9. Except for one isolate carrying only
blaTEM-1B, all of the isolates carried blaSHV-12 and blaTEM-1B, and were all
considered multidrug-resistant as they harboured genes encoding resistance to
aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, fosfomycin, macrolides, quinolones,
sulfonamides, trimethoprim and tetracyclines. Plasmid replicon types IncHI2 and
IncHI2A were detected in all mcr-9-positive isolates.
CONCLUSION: The occurrence of mcr-9 was common among clinical ESBL-producing
Enterobacteriaceae isolates from horses in Sweden and was linked to the
ESBL-encoding gene blaSHV-12 and plasmid replicon types IncHI2 and IncHI2A.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.08.007 
PMID: 31494305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Aug 23;63(9). pii: e00965-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00965-19. Print 2019 Sep.

mcr-9, an Inducible Gene Encoding an Acquired Phosphoethanolamine Transferase in 
Escherichia coli, and Its Origin.

Kieffer N(1)(2), Royer G(3)(4)(5), Decousser JW(3)(4), Bourrel AS(3)(4), Palmieri
M(1)(6), Ortiz De La Rosa JM(1)(2), Jacquier H(4)(7), Denamur E(4)(8), Nordmann
P(1)(2)(9)(10), Poirel L(11)(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Molecular Microbiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Science, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)INSERM European Unit (IAME, France), University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
(3)Laboratoire de Bactériologie et d'Hygiène-Hospitalière, CHU Henri Mondor,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Créteil, France.
(4)IAME, UMR1137 INSERM, Université Paris Diderot, Université Paris Nord,
Emerging Antibiotic Resistance in Gram-Negative Bacteria, Paris, France.
(5)LABGeM, Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, 
Université Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(6)bioMérieux, Data Analytics Unit, La Balme Les Grottes, France.
(7)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Infectious Agents, Saint
Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal University Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(8)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Bichat, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)Swiss National Reference Center for Emerging Antibiotic Resistance (NARA),
University of Fribourg, Switzerland.
(10)Institute for Microbiology, University of Lausanne and University Hospital
Centre, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(11)Medical and Molecular Microbiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Science, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland laurent.poirel@unifr.ch.

Erratum in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Oct 22;63(11):.

The plasmid-located mcr-9 gene, encoding a putative phosphoethanolamine
transferase, was identified in a colistin-resistant human fecal Escherichia coli 
strain belonging to a very rare phylogroup, the D-ST69-O15:H6 clone. This MCR-9
protein shares 33% to 65% identity with the other plasmid-encoded MCR-type
enzymes identified (MCR-1 to -8) that have been found as sources of acquired
resistance to polymyxins in Enterobacteriaceae Analysis of the lipopolysaccharide
of the MCR-9-producing isolate revealed a function similar to that of MCR-1 by
adding a phosphoethanolamine group to lipid A and subsequently modifying the
structure of the lipopolysaccharide. However, a minor impact on susceptibility to
polymyxins was noticed once the mcr-9 gene was cloned and produced in an E. coli 
K-12-derived strain. Nevertheless, we showed here that subinhibitory
concentrations of colistin induced the expression of the mcr-9 gene, leading to
increased MIC levels. This inducible expression was mediated by a two-component
regulatory system encoded by the qseC and qseB genes located downstream of mcr-9 
Genetic analysis showed that the mcr-9 gene was carried by an IncHI2 plasmid. In 
silico analysis revealed that the plasmid-encoded MCR-9 shared significant amino 
acid identity (ca. 80%) with the chromosomally encoded MCR-like proteins from
Buttiauxella spp. In particular, Buttiauxella gaviniae was found to harbor a gene
encoding MCR-BG, sharing 84% identity with MCR-9. That gene was neither expressed
nor inducible in its original host, which was fully susceptible to polymyxins.
This work showed that mcr genes may circulate silently and remain undetected
unless induced by colistin.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00965-19 
PMCID: PMC6709461
PMID: 31209009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2017 Dec 5;200(1). pii: e00564-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00564-17. Print
2018 Jan 1.

Conversion of Norepinephrine to 3,4-Dihdroxymandelic Acid in Escherichia coli
Requires the QseBC Quorum-Sensing System and the FeaR Transcription Factor.

Pasupuleti S(1), Sule N(1), Manson MD(2), Jayaraman A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
mike@mail.bio.tamu.edu arulj@tamu.edu.
(3)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA mike@mail.bio.tamu.edu arulj@tamu.edu.

The detection of norepinephrine (NE) as a chemoattractant by Escherichia coli
strain K-12 requires the combined action of the TynA monoamine oxidase and the
FeaB aromatic aldehyde dehydrogenase. The role of these enzymes is to convert NE 
into 3,4-dihydroxymandelic acid (DHMA), which is a potent chemoattractant sensed 
by the Tsr chemoreceptor. These two enzymes must be induced by prior exposure to 
NE, and cells that are exposed to NE for the first time initially show minimal
chemotaxis toward it. The induction of TynA and FeaB requires the QseC
quorum-sensing histidine kinase, and the signaling cascade requires new protein
synthesis. Here, we demonstrate that the cognate response regulator for QseC, the
transcription factor QseB, is also required for induction. The related
quorum-sensing kinase QseE appears not to be part of the signaling pathway, but
its cognate response regulator, QseF, which is also a substrate for
phosphotransfer from QseC, plays a nonessential role. The promoter of the feaR
gene, which encodes a transcription factor that has been shown to be essential
for the expression of tynA and feaB, has two predicted QseB-binding sites. One of
these sites appears to be in an appropriate position to stimulate transcription
from the P1 promoter of the feaR gene. This study unites two well-known pathways:
one for expression of genes regulated by catecholamines (QseBC) and one for
expression of genes required for metabolism of aromatic amines (FeaR, TynA, and
FeaB). This cross talk allows E. coli to convert the host-derived and
chemotactically inert NE into the potent bacterial chemoattractant
DHMA.IMPORTANCE The chemotaxis of E. coli K-12 to norepinephrine (NE) requires
the conversion of NE to 3,4-dihydroxymandleic acid (DHMA), and DHMA is both an
attractant and inducer of virulence gene expression for a pathogenic
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strain. The induction of virulence by DHMA and
NE requires QseC. The results described here show that the cognate response
regulator for QseC, QseB, is also required for conversion of NE into DHMA.
Production of DHMA requires induction of a pathway involved in the metabolism of 
aromatic amines. Thus, the QseBC sensory system provides a direct link between
virulence and chemotaxis, suggesting that chemotaxis to host signaling molecules 
may require that those molecules are first metabolized by bacterial enzymes to
generate the actual chemoattractant.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00564-17 
PMCID: PMC5717157
PMID: 29038253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplM) AND (rpsI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Sep 5;47(15):8193-8206. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz502.

A DEAD-box protein regulates ribosome assembly through control of ribosomal
protein synthesis.

Iost I(1), Jain C(2).

Author information: 
(1)ARNA Laboratory, INSERM U1212, CNRS UMR 5320, Université de Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

DEAD-box proteins (DBPs) comprise a large family of proteins that most commonly
have been identified as regulators of ribosome assembly. The Escherichia coli
DBP, SrmB, represents a model bacterial DBP whose absence impairs formation of
the large ribosomal subunit (LSU). To define the basis for SrmB function,
suppressors of the ribosomal defect of ΔsrmB strains were isolated. The major
class of suppressors was found to map to the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the 
rplM-rpsI operon, which encodes the ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) L13 and S9.
An analysis of protein abundance indicated that both r-proteins are
under-produced in the ΔsrmB strain, but are increased in these suppressors,
implicating r-protein underproduction as the molecular basis for the observed
ribosomal defects. Reduced r-protein synthesis was determined to be caused by
intrinsic transcription termination within the rplM 5' UTR that is abrogated by
SrmB. These results reveal a specific mechanism for DBP regulation of ribosomal
assembly, indirectly mediated through its effects on r-protein expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz502 
PMCID: PMC6736130
PMID: 31188443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2016 Aug 25;198(18):2494-502. doi: 10.1128/JB.00187-16. Print 2016
Sep 15.

Regulation of Ribosomal Protein Operons rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA at
the Transcriptional and Translational Levels.

Aseev LV(1), Koledinskaya LS(1), Boni IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russia
irina_boni@ibch.ru.

It is widely assumed that in the best-characterized model bacterium Escherichia
coli, transcription units encoding ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and regulation
of their expression have been already well defined. However, transcription start 
sites for several E. coli r-protein operons have been established only very
recently, so that information concerning the regulation of these operons at the
transcriptional or posttranscriptional level is still missing. This paper
describes for the first time the in vivo regulation of three r-protein operons,
rplM-rpsI, rpmB-rpmG, and rplU-rpmA The results demonstrate that transcription of
all three operons is subject to ppGpp/DksA-dependent negative stringent control
under amino acid starvation, in parallel with the rRNA operons. By using
single-copy translational fusions with the chromosomal lacZ gene, we show here
that at the translation level only one of these operons, rplM-rpsI, is regulated 
by the mechanism of autogenous repression involving the 5' untranslated region
(UTR) of the operon mRNA, while rpmB-rpmG and rplU-rpmA are not subject to this
type of regulation. This may imply that translational feedback control is not a
general rule for modulating the expression of E. coli r-protein operons. Finally,
we report that L13, a primary protein in 50S ribosomal subunit assembly, serves
as a repressor of rplM-rpsI expression in vivo, acting at a target within the
rplM translation initiation region. Thus, L13 represents a novel example of
regulatory r-proteins in bacteria.IMPORTANCE: It is important to obtain a deeper 
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms responsible for coordinated and
balanced synthesis of ribosomal components. In this paper, we highlight the major
role of a stringent response in regulating transcription of three previously
unexplored r-protein operons, and we show that only one of them is subject to
feedback regulation at the translational level. Improved knowledge of the
regulatory pathways controlling ribosome biogenesis may promote the development
of novel antibacterial agents.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00187-16 
PMCID: PMC4999927
PMID: 27381917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Gen Genet. 1985;198(2):279-82.

Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of the genes for ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI)
and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli.

Isono S, Thamm S, Kitakawa M, Isono K.

The genes for the ribosomal proteins S9 (rpsI) and L13 (rplM) of Escherichia coli
have been cloned into a lambda phage vector termed L47.1. The two genes were
identified by infecting UV-light irradiated cells with the resultant phages and
analyzing the protein products by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Suitable
DNA fragments of the isolate were cloned subsequently into M13 phage vectors and 
their nucleotide sequence was determined by the dideoxy method. It is evident
that the two genes form a transcriptional unit, the rplM gene being
promoter-proximal. There is a typical signal sequence for transcriptional
termination after the rpsI gene. The codon usage pattern in the two genes is
similar to other ribosomal protein genes of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00383007 
PMID: 3884974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1983 Feb;153(2):709-15.

Escherichia coli kasugamycin dependence arising from mutation at the rpsI locus.

Dabbs ER.

Escherichia coli mutants with alterations in the electrophoretic mobility of
ribosomal protein S9 were used to locate rpsI, the gene for this protein, on the 
linkage map. rpsI was located at about 70 min, roughly halfway between argG and
fabE. It was very close to the gene for ribosomal protein L13, rplM. Another
mutation at the rpsI locus gave rise to a phenotype of kasugamycin dependence and
resistance. In this mutant, dependence on antibiotic came from kasugamycin being 
necessary to slow the rate of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.153.2.709-715.1983 
PMCID: PMC221688
PMID: 6337124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degQ) AND (degS)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Protein Expr Purif. 2018 Aug;148:9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.03.012. Epub 2018 
Mar 27.

Improved inducible expression of Bacillus naganoensis pullulanase from
recombinant Bacillus subtilis by enhancer regulation.

Deng Y(1), Nie Y(2), Zhang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Xu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
(2)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
Electronic address: ynie@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(3)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China;
State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 1800
Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China; 2011 Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety
and Nutrition, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi 214122, China.
Electronic address: yxu@jiangnan.edu.cn.

Pullulanase is crucial to the specific hydrolysis of branch points in amylopectin
and is generally employed as an important enzyme in the starch-processing
industry. Recombinant Bacillus subtilis that employs an inducible promoter would 
be a suitable candidate for pullulanase expression because of its safety and
controllable production, but its level of pullulanase activity is relatively low.
In this study, we investigated the effect of the enhancers DegQ, DegU, and DegS
on pullulanase expression in a recombinant B. subtilis inducible system. The
genes degQ, degU, and degS were introduced to the recombinant plasmid
pMA0911-PsacB-pul harboring the promoter PsacB, signal peptide LipA, and gene
encoding pullulanase. The regulatory effects of the enhancers involved in
recombinant plasmids on pullulanase expression level were evaluated in B.
subtilis WB600 and WB800, respectively. The positive regulation of DegQ toward
pullulanase expression was detected from B. subtilis WB800, leading to a 60%
increase in enzyme activity. In addition, enzyme activity was further enhanced by
inserting the degQ gene to the position closer to the promoter PsacB.
Consequently, pullulanase activity reached 26.5 U ml-1 from the B. subtilis
WB800/pMA0911-PsacB- pul-degQ(N) after expression optimization, which was a
5.9-fold increase compared to that of the original strain B. subtilis
WB800/pMA0911-PsacB-pul. Hence, the inducible expression of the enzyme was
efficiently enhanced by regulating the enhancer DegQ from recombinant B. subtilis
WB800.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.03.012 
PMID: 29596990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cell Commun Signal. 2016 Dec 8;14(1):30.

HtrA-mediated E-cadherin cleavage is limited to DegP and DegQ homologs expressed 
by gram-negative pathogens.

Abfalter CM(1), Schubert M(1), Götz C(1), Schmidt TP(1), Posselt G(1), Wessler
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Paris-Lodron
University of Salzburg, Billroth Str. 11, A-5020, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Division of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Paris-Lodron
University of Salzburg, Billroth Str. 11, A-5020, Salzburg, Austria.
silja.wessler@sbg.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: The serine proteases HtrA/DegP secreted by the human gastrointestinal
pathogens Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) and Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni)
cleave the mammalian cell adhesion protein E-cadherin to open intercellular
adhesions. A wide range of bacteria also expresses the HtrA/DegP homologs DegQ
and/or DegS, which significantly differ in structure and function.
METHODS: E-cadherin shedding was investigated in infection experiments with the
Gram-negative pathogens H. pylori, enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC),
Salmonella enterica subsp. Enterica (S. Typhimurium), Yersinia enterocolitica (Y.
enterocolitica), and Proteus mirabilis (P. mirabilis), which express different
combinations of HtrAs. Annotated wild-type htrA/degP, degQ and degS genes were
cloned and proteolytically inactive mutants were generated by a serine-to-alanine
exchange in the active center. All HtrA variants were overexpressed and purified 
to compare their proteolytic activities in casein zymography and in vitro
E-cadherin cleavage experiments.
RESULTS: Infection of epithelial cells resulted in a strong E-cadherin ectodomain
shedding as reflected by the loss of full length E-cadherin in whole cell lysates
and formation of the soluble 90 kDa extracellular domain of E-cadherin (NTF) in
the supernatants of infected cells. Importantly, comparing the caseinolytic and
E-cadherin cleavage activities of HtrA/DegP, DegQ and DegS proteins revealed that
DegP and DegQ homologs from H. pylori, S. Typhimurium, Y. enterocolitica, EPEC
and P. mirabilis, but not activated DegS, cleaved E-cadherin as a substrate in
vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that E-cadherin cleavage is confined to
HtrA/DegP and DegQ proteins representing an important prevalent step in bacterial
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-016-0153-y 
PMCID: PMC5146865
PMID: 27931258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Mar;70(5):761-75. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1076-4. Epub
2012 Jul 18.

Architecture and regulation of HtrA-family proteins involved in protein quality
control and stress response.

Hansen G(1), Hilgenfeld R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
University of Lübeck, 23538, Lübeck, Germany. hansen@biochem.uni-luebeck.de

Protein quality control is vital for all living cells and sophisticated molecular
mechanisms have evolved to prevent the excessive accumulation of unfolded
proteins. High-temperature requirement A (HtrA) proteases have been identified as
important ATP-independent quality-control factors in most species. HtrA proteins 
harbor a serine-protease domain and at least one peptide-binding PDZ domain to
ensure efficient removal of misfolded or damaged proteins. One distinctive
property of HtrAs is their ability to assemble into complex oligomers. Whereas
all examined HtrAs are capable of forming pyramidal 3-mers, higher-order
complexes consisting of up to 24 molecules have been reported. Tight control of
chaperone and protease function is of pivotal importance in preventing
deleterious HtrA-protease activity. In recent years, structural biology provided 
detailed insights into the molecular basis of the regulatory mechanisms, which
include unique intramolecular allosteric signaling cascades and the dynamic
switching of oligomeric states of HtrA proteins. Based on these results,
functional models for many family members have been developed. The HtrA protein
family represents a remarkable example of how structural and functional diversity
is attained from the assembly of simple molecular building blocks.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-012-1076-4 
PMID: 22806565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Dec;77(23):8249-58. doi: 10.1128/AEM.05827-11. Epub 
2011 Sep 30.

Mutations suppressing the loss of DegQ function in Bacillus subtilis (natto)
poly-γ-glutamate synthesis.

Do TH(1), Suzuki Y, Abe N, Kaneko J, Itoh Y, Kimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Microbiology Division, National Food Research Institute, Kannondai
2-1-12, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8642, Japan.

The degQ gene of Bacillus subtilis (natto), encoding a small peptide of 46 amino 
acids, is essential for the synthesis of extracellular poly-gamma-glutamate
(γPGA). To elucidate the role of DegQ in γPGA synthesis, we knocked out the degQ 
gene in Bacillus subtilis (natto) and screened for suppressor mutations that
restored γPGA synthesis in the absence of DegQ. Suppressor mutations were found
in degS, the receptor kinase gene of the DegS-DegU two-component system.
Recombinant DegS-His(6) mutant proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli cells 
and subjected to an in vitro phosphorylation assay. Compared with the wild type, 
mutant DegS-His(6) proteins showed higher levels of autophosphorylation (R208Q,
M195I, L248F, and D250N), reduced autodephosphorylation (D250N), reduced
phosphatase activity toward DegU, or a reduced ability to stimulate the
autodephosphorylation activity of DegU (R208Q, D249G, M195I, L248F, and D250N)
and stabilized DegU in the phosphorylated form. These mutant DegS proteins mimic 
the effect of DegQ on wild-type DegSU in vitro. Interestingly, DegQ stabilizes
phosphorylated DegS only in the presence of DegU, indicating a complex
interaction of these three proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.05827-11 
PMCID: PMC3233065
PMID: 21965392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Postepy Biochem. 2011;57(1):109-14.

[Chloroplast Deg proteases].

[Article in Polish]

Grabsztunowicz M(1), Luciński R, Baranek M, Sikora B, Jackowski G.

Author information: 
(1)Zakład Fizjologii Roślin, Uniwersytet im. A. Mickiewicza, Poznań.

For some chloroplast proteases ATP binding and hydrolysis is not necessary for
their catalytic activity, most probably because even strongly unfolded substrates
may penetrate their catalytic chamber. Deg1, 2, 5 and 8 are the best known of
Arabidopsis thaliana ATP- independent chloroplast proteases, encoded by
orthologues of genes coding for DegP, DegQ and DegS proteases of Escherichia
coli. Current awareness in the area of structure and functions of chloroplast
Degs is much more limited vs the one about their bacterial counterparts. Deg5 and
Deg8 form a catalytic heterododecamer which is loosely attached to luminal side
of thylakoid membrane. The complex catalyses--supported by Deg1 and one of FtsH
proteases--the degradation of PsbA damaged due to plant exposition to elevated
irradiance and thus these protease are of key importance for the plants'
sensitivity to photoinhibition. Deg2 role in the disposal of damaged PsbA has not
been elucidated. Recombinant Deg1 may degrade PsbO and plastocyanin in vitro but 
it is not clear whether this reaction is performed in vivo as well.


PMID: 21735826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 2;286(35):30680-30690. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243832. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

Molecular adaptation of the DegQ protease to exert protein quality control in the
bacterial cell envelope.

Sawa J(1), Malet H(2), Krojer T(1), Canellas F(1), Ehrmann M(3), Clausen T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Structural Molecular Biology, 
Birkbeck College, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Geography, University
Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Pathology, A-1030 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
clausen@imp.univie.ac.at.

To react to distinct stress situations and to prevent the accumulation of
misfolded proteins, all cells employ a number of proteases and chaperones, which 
together set up an efficient protein quality control system. The functionality of
proteins in the cell envelope of Escherichia coli is monitored by the HtrA
proteases DegS, DegP, and DegQ. In contrast with DegP and DegS, the structure and
function of DegQ has not been addressed in detail. Here, we show that substrate
binding triggers the conversion of the resting DegQ hexamer into catalytically
active 12- and 24-mers. Interestingly, substrate-induced oligomer reassembly and 
protease activation depends on the first PDZ domain but not on the second.
Therefore, the regulatory mechanism originally identified in DegP should be a
common feature of HtrA proteases, most of which encompass only a single PDZ
domain. Using a DegQ mutant lacking the second PDZ domain, we determined the high
resolution crystal structure of a dodecameric HtrA complex. The nearly identical 
domain orientation of protease and PDZ domains within 12- and 24-meric HtrA
complexes reveals a conserved PDZ1 → L3 → LD/L1/L2 signaling cascade, in which
loop L3 senses the repositioned PDZ1 domain of higher order, substrate-engaged
particles and activates protease function. Furthermore, our in vitro and in vivo 
data imply a pH-related function of DegQ in the bacterial cell envelope.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243832 
PMCID: PMC3162429
PMID: 21685389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 28;108(26):10490-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1101084108. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

The Legionella HtrA homologue DegQ is a self-compartmentizing protease that forms
large 12-meric assemblies.

Wrase R(1), Scott H, Hilgenfeld R, Hansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.

Proteases of the HtrA family are key factors dealing with folding stress in the
periplasmatic compartment of prokaryotes. In Escherichia coli, the
well-characterized HtrA family members DegS and DegP counteract the accumulation 
of unfolded outer-membrane proteins under stress conditions. Whereas DegS serves 
as a folding-stress sensor, DegP is a chaperone-protease facilitating refolding
or degradation of defective outer-membrane proteins. Here, we report the
2.15-Å-resolution crystal structure of the second major chaperone-protease of the
periplasm, DegQ from Legionella fallonii. DegQ assembles into large, cage-like
12-mers that form independently of unfolded substrate proteins. We provide
evidence that 12-mer formation is essential for the degradation of substrate
proteins but not for the chaperone activity of DegQ. In the current model for the
regulation of periplasmatic chaperone-proteases, 6-meric assemblies represent
important protease-resting states. However, DegQ is unable to form such 6-mers,
suggesting divergent regulatory mechanisms for DegQ and DegP. To understand how
the protease activity of DegQ is controlled, we probed its functional properties 
employing designed protein variants. Combining crystallographic, biochemical, and
mutagenic data, we present a mechanistic model that suggests how protease
activity of DegQ 12-mers is intrinsically regulated and how deleterious
proteolysis by free DegQ 3-mers is prevented. Our study sheds light on a
previously uncharacterized component of the prokaryotic stress-response system
with implications for other members of the HtrA family.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1101084108 
PMCID: PMC3127897
PMID: 21670246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Infect Immun. 2006 Jul;74(7):4030-8.

Role of sigma E-regulated genes in Escherichia coli uropathogenesis.

Redford P(1), Welch RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Microbiology & Immunology, Rm. 481 MSB, 1300 University Ave.,
Madison, WI 53706-1532, USA.

The sigma E regulon encodes proteins for maintenance and repair of the
Escherichia coli cell envelope. Previously, we observed that an antirepressor of 
sigma E, DegS, is essential for uropathogenic E. coli virulence. Here we use a
mouse urinary tract infection model to assay the virulence of mutants of E. coli 
genes described as sigma E dependent. Deletion mutants of candidate genes were
made in the uropathogenic E. coli strain CFT073. Swiss Webster female mice were
inoculated with a mixture of mutant and wild-type strains. Bladder and kidney
homogenates were cultured 2 days after infection, and CFU of the wild type and
mutant were compared. Eleven mutants were assayed, and two, CFT073 degP and
CFT073 skp, showed significantly diminished survival compared to wild type. DegP 
is a chaperone and degradase active in the periplasm. Skp is also a periplasmic
chaperone. The virulence of the skp deletion mutant could not be restored by
complementation with skp. The virulence of the degP deletion mutant, in contrast,
could be restored. However, complementation with a degP allele encoding a
serine-to-alanine (S210A) mutation at the protease active site fails to restore
virulence. Unlike degP mutants in other bacteria, the E. coli degP mutant is
tolerant of oxidative stress. It disappears abruptly from bladder and kidney
cultures between 6 and 12 hours after inoculation. A mutant of degQ, a close
homolog of degP, was not attenuated in mice. This is the first report that the
DegP degradase is an E. coli virulence factor in an animal infection model.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01984-05 
PMCID: PMC1489677
PMID: 16790776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Photosynth Res. 2005 Jun;84(1-3):57-63.

Transcriptional profiles and structural models of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 
Deg proteases.

Jansén T(1), Kidron H, Taipaleenmäki H, Salminen T, Mäenpää P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland.

The Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 genome harbours a deg gene family consisting of
three members, degP (htrA, slr1204), degQ (hhoA, sll1679) and degS (hhoB,
sll1427). We studied the environmental regulation of the Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803 deg genes at the level of transcription and protein structures of the gene
products to evaluate their hypothetical role in D1 protein turnover. Northern
blotting showed that transcription of the deg genes is differentially regulated, 
supporting a view of distinct roles of Degs in cellular processes. The
oligomerization state as well as the three dimensional structures of the
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 Deg proteases were predicted based on an amino acid
sequence alignment and comparison of the Deg crystal structures from human,
Escherichia coli and Thermotoga maritima. The structures of the Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 Degs resemble more the Thermotoga maritima Deg enzyme structure than the
Escherichia coli one. Moreover, the structures of the LA-loops hint towards a
homotrimeric form of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 Deg proteases.

DOI: 10.1007/s11120-005-0475-x 
PMID: 16049755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 May 31;38(3):266-74.

Structure and function of HtrA family proteins, the key players in protein
quality control.

Kim DY(1), Kim KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

High temperature requirement A (HtrA) and its homologues constitute the HtrA
family proteins, a group of heat shock-induced serine proteases. Bacterial HtrA
proteins perform crucial functions with regard to protein quality control in the 
periplasmic space, functioning as both molecular chaperones and proteases. In
contrast to other bacterial quality control proteins, including ClpXP, ClpAP, and
HslUV, HtrA proteins contain no regulatory components or ATP binding domains.
Thus, they are commonly referred to as ATP-independent chaperone-proteases.
Whereas the function of ATP-dependent chaperone-proteases is regulated by ATP
hydrolysis, HtrA exhibits a PDZ domain and a temperature-dependent switch
mechanism, which effects the change in its function from molecular chaperone to
protease. This mechanism is also related to substrate recognition and the fine
control of its function. Structural and biochemical analyses of the three HtrA
proteins, DegP, DegQ, and DegS, have provided us with clues as to the functional 
regulation of HtrA proteins, as well as their roles in protein quality control at
atomic scales. The objective of this brief review is to discuss some of the
recent studies which have been conducted regarding the structure and function of 
these HtrA proteins, and to compare their roles in the context of protein quality
control.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2005.38.3.266 
PMID: 15943900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((degS) AND (rpoE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biology (Basel). 2020 Oct 3;9(10). pii: E323. doi: 10.3390/biology9100323.

Characterisation and Mutagenesis Study of An Alternative Sigma Factor Gene (hrpL)
from Erwinia mallotivora Reveal Its Central Role in Papaya Dieback Disease.

Tamizi AA(1), Abu-Bakar N(1), Samsuddin AF(2), Rozano L(1), Ahmad-Redzuan R(1),
Abdul-Murad AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agri-Omics and Bioinformatics Programme, Biotechnology and Nanotechnology
Research Centre, Malaysian Agricultural Research and Development Institute
Headquarters, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi 43600, Selangor, Malaysia.

The alternative sigma (σ) factor E, RpoE or HrpL, has been reported to be
involved in stress- and pathogenicity-related transcription initiation in
Escherichia coli and many other Gram-negative bacteria, including Erwinia spp.
and Pseudomonas spp. A previous study identified the hrpL/rpoE transcript as one 
of the significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during early E.
mallotivora infection in papaya and those data serve as the basis of the current 
project. Here, the full coding DNA sequence (CDS) of hrpL from E. mallotivora
(EmhrpL) was determined to be 549 bp long, and it encoded a 21.3 kDa HrpL protein
that possessed two highly conserved sigma-70 (σ70) motifs-σR2 and σR4. Nucleotide
sequence alignment revealed the hrpL from E. mallotivora shared high sequence
similarity to rpoE/hrpL from E. tracheiphila (83%), E. pyrifoliae (81%), and E.
tasmaniensis (80%). Phylogenetics analysis indicated hrpL from E. mallotivora to 
be monophyletic with rpoEs/hrpLs from Pantoea vagans, E. herbicola, and E.
tracheiphila. Structural analysis postulated that the E. mallotivora's
alternative σ factor was non-transmembranic and was an extracytoplasmic function 
(ECF) protein-characteristics shared by other σ factors in different bacterial
species. Notably, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) study through molecular
docking suggested the σ factor could be possibly inhibited by an anti-σ. Finally,
a knockout of hrpL in E. mallotivora (ΔEmhrpL) resulted in avirulence in
four-month-old papaya plants. These findings have revealed that the hrpL is a
necessary element in E. mallotivora pathogenicity and also predicted that the
gene can be inhibited by an anti-σ.

DOI: 10.3390/biology9100323 
PMCID: PMC7600996
PMID: 33023069 


2. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e79520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079520. eCollection
2013.

DegS and RseP homologous proteases are involved in singlet oxygen dependent
activation of RpoE in Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Nuss AM(1), Adnan F, Weber L, Berghoff BA, Glaeser J, Klug G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Giessen University, Giessen, 
Germany ; Department of Molecular Infection Biology, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

Singlet oxygen ((1)O2) is the main agent of photooxidative stress and is
generated by photosensitizers as (bacterio)chlorophylls. It leads to the damage
of cellular macromolecules and therefore photosynthetic organisms have to mount
an adaptive response to (1)O2 formation. A major player of the photooxidative
stress response in Rhodobacter sphaeroides is the alternative sigma factor RpoE, 
which is inactivated under non-stress conditions by its cognate anti-sigma factor
ChrR. By using random mutagenesis we identified RSP_1090 to be required for full 
activation of the RpoE response under (1)O2 stress, but not under organic
peroxide stress. In this study we show that both RSP_1090 and RSP_1091 are
required for full resistance towards (1)O2. Moreover, we revealed that the DegS
and RseP homologs RSP_3242 and RSP_2710 contribute to (1)O2 resistance and
promote ChrR proteolysis. The RpoE signaling pathway in R. sphaeroides is
therefore highly similar to that of Escherichia coli, although very different
anti-sigma factors control RpoE activity. Based on the acquired results, the
current model for RpoE activation in response to (1)O2 exposure in R. sphaeroides
was extended.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079520 
PMCID: PMC3818230
PMID: 24223961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Reversal of the ΔdegP phenotypes by a novel rpoE allele of Escherichia coli.

Leiser OP(1), Charlson ES, Gerken H, Misra R.

Author information: 
(1)The Microbial Genetics and Genomics Center, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, United States of America.

RseA sequesters RpoE (σ(E)) to the inner membrane of Escherichia coli when
envelope stress is low. Elevated envelope stress triggers RseA cleavage by the
sequential action of two membrane proteases, DegS and RseP, releasing σ(E) to
activate an envelope stress reducing pathway. Revertants of a ΔdegP ΔbamB strain,
which fails to grow at 37°C due to high envelope stress, harbored mutations in
the rseA and rpoE genes. Null and missense rseA mutations constitutively
hyper-activated the σ(E) regulon and significantly reduced the major outer
membrane protein (OMP) levels. In contrast, a novel rpoE allele, rpoE3, resulting
from the partial duplication of the rpoE gene, increased σ(E) levels greater than
that seen in the rseA mutant background but did not reduce OMP levels. A
σ(E)-dependent RybB::LacZ construct showed only a weak activation of the σ(E)
pathway by rpoE3. Despite this, rpoE3 fully reversed the growth and envelope
vesiculation phenotypes of ΔdegP. Interestingly, rpoE3 also brought down the
modestly activated Cpx envelope stress pathway in the ΔdegP strain to the wild
type level, showing the complementary nature of the σ(E) and Cpx pathways.
Through employing a labile mutant periplasmic protein, AcrA(L222Q), it was
determined that the rpoE3 mutation overcomes the ΔdegP phenotypes, in part, by
activating a σ(E)-dependent proteolytic pathway. Our data suggest that a
reduction in the OMP levels is not intrinsic to the σ(E)-mediated mechanism of
lowering envelope stress. They also suggest that under extreme envelope stress, a
tight homeostasis loop between RseA and σ(E) may partly be responsible for cell
death, and this loop can be broken by mutations that either lower RseA activity
or increase σ(E) levels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033979 
PMCID: PMC3306311
PMID: 22439016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Phytopathology. 2011 Feb;101(2):271-80. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-10-0076.

Mutation of a degS homologue in Enterobacter cloacae decreases colonization and
biological control of damping-off on cucumber.

Roberts DP(1), Lohrke SM, McKenna L, Lakshman DK, Kong H, Lydon J.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture - Agriculture Research Service,
Beltsville, MD, USA. dan.roberts@ars.usda.gov

We have been using mutagenesis to determine how biocontrol bacteria such as
Enterobacter cloacae 501R3 deal with complex nutritional environments found in
association with plants. E. cloacae C10, a mutant of 501R3 with a transposon
insertion in degS, was diminished in growth on synthetic cucumber root exudate
(SRE), colonization of cucumber seed and roots, and control of damping-off of
cucumber caused by Pythium ultimum. DegS, a periplasmic serine protease in the
closely related bacterium Escherichia coli K12, is required for the RpoE-mediated
stress response. C10 containing wild-type degS from 501R3 or from E. coli K12 on 
pBeloBAC11 was significantly increased in growth on SRE, colonization of cucumber
roots, and control of P. ultimum relative to C10 containing pBeloBAC11 alone. C10
and 501R3 were similar in sensitivity to acidic conditions, plant-derived
phenolic compounds, oxidative stress caused by hydrogen peroxide, dessication,
and high osmoticum; stress conditions potentially associated with plants. This
study demonstrates a role for degS in the spermosphere and rhizosphere during
colonization and disease control by Enterobacter cloacae. This study implicates, 
for the first time, the involvement of DegS and, by extension, the RpoE-mediated 
stress response, in reducing stress on E. cloacae resulting from the complex
nutritional environments in the spermosphere and rhizosphere.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-10-0076 
PMID: 20942652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Nov;62(3):838-52. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Loss of Hfq activates the sigmaE-dependent envelope stress response in Salmonella
enterica.

Figueroa-Bossi N(1), Lemire S, Maloriol D, Balbontín R, Casadesús J, Bossi L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Ubiquitous RNA-binding protein Hfq mediates the regulatory activity of many small
RNAs (sRNAs) in bacteria. To identify potential targets for Hfq-mediated
regulation in Salmonella, we searched for lacZ translational fusions whose
activity varied in the presence or absence of Hfq. Fusions downregulated by Hfq
were more common than fusions showing the opposite response. Surprisingly, in a
subset of isolates from the major class, the higher activity in the absence of
Hfq was due to transcriptional activation by the alternative sigma factor RpoE
(sigmaE). Activation of the sigmaE regulon normally results from envelope stress 
conditions that elicit proteolytic cleavage of the anti-sigmaE factor RseA. Using
an epitope tagged variant of RseA, we found that RseA is cleaved at an increased 
rate in a strain lacking Hfq. This cleavage was dependent on the DegS protease
and could be completely prevented upon expressing the hfq gene from an inducible 
promoter. Thus, loss of Hfq function appears to affect envelope biogenesis in a
way that mimics a stress condition and thereby induces the sigmaE response
constitutively. In a RseA mutant, activation of the sigmaE response causes
Hfq-dependent downregulation of outer membrane protein (OMP) genes including
lamB, ompA, ompC and ompF. For ompA, downregulation results in part from
sigmaE-dependent accumulation of MicA (SraD), a small RNA recently shown to
downregulate ompA transcript levels in stationary phase. We show that the micA
gene is under sigmaE control, and that DegS-mediated sigmaE release is required
for the accumulation of MicA RNA upon entry into stationary phase. A similar
mechanism involving additional, still unidentified, sRNAs, might underlie the
growth phase-dependent regulation of other OMP mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05413.x 
PMID: 16999834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Infect Immun. 2005 Jan;73(1):459-63.

Effect of inactivation of degS on Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium in
vitro and in vivo.

Rowley G(1), Stevenson A, Kormanec J, Roberts M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Comparative Medicine, Professor of Molecular Bacteriology,
Department of Veterinary Pathology, Glasgow University Veterinary School,
Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, United Kingdom. m.roberts@vet.gla.ac.uk

The alternative sigma factor (RpoE sigma(E)) enables Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium to adapt to stressful conditions, such as oxidative stress, nutrient 
deprivation, and growth in mammalian tissues. Infection of mice by Salmonella
serovar Typhimurium also requires sigma(E). In Escherichia coli, activation of
the sigma(E) pathway is dependent on proteolysis of the anti-sigma factor RseA
and is initiated by DegS. DegS is also important in order for E. coli to cause
extraintestinal infection in mice. We constructed a degS mutant of the serovar
Typhimurium strain SL1344 and compared its behavior in vitro and in vivo with
those of its wild-type (WT) parent and an isogenic rpoE mutant. Unlike E. coli
degS strains, the Salmonella serovar Typhimurium degS strain grew as well as the 
WT strain at 42 degrees C. The degS mutant survived very poorly in murine
macrophages in vitro and was highly attenuated compared with the WT strain for
both the oral and parenteral routes of infection in mice. However, the degS
mutant was not as attenuated as the serovar Typhimurium rpoE mutant: 100- to
1,000-fold more degS bacteria than rpoE bacteria were present in the livers and
spleens of mice 24 h after intraperitoneal challenge. In most assays, the rpoE
mutant was more severely affected than the degS mutant and a sigma(E)-dependent
reporter gene was more active in the degS mutant than the rpoE strain. These
findings indicate that degS is important for activation of the sigma(E) pathway
in serovar Typhimurium but that alternative pathways for sigma(E) activation
probably exist.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.1.459-463.2005 
PMCID: PMC538943
PMID: 15618185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 15;16(16):2147-55.

YaeL (EcfE) activates the sigma(E) pathway of stress response through a site-2
cleavage of anti-sigma(E), RseA.

Kanehara K(1), Ito K, Akiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Escherichia coli YaeL (EcfE) is a homolog of human site-2 protease (S2P), a
membrane-bound zinc metalloprotease involved in regulated intramembrane
proteolysis. We have shown previously that YaeL, having essential metalloprotease
active site motifs in the cytoplasmic domain, is indispensable for viability.
Here, we obtained rpoE, encoding an extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor
(sigma(E)), as a multicopy suppressor against the yaeL disruption. Whereas
sigma(E) is thought to be activated by regulated cleavage of RseA on the
periplasmic side by the DegS protease, we found that a degradation intermediate
of RseA consisting of the transmembrane and the cytoplasmic domains accumulated
in the YaeL-depleted cells. This intermediate was degraded on expression of YaeL 
but not of its metalloprotease motif mutants. Cells depleted of YaeL were
incapable of activating a sigma(E)-dependent promoter in response to an envelope 
stress. It is suggested that sigma(E) activation involves two successive
proteolytic cleavages: first, at a periplasmic site by DegS; second, at a
cytoplasmic or intramembrane site by YaeL. Thus, YaeL is positively required for 
the sigma(E) extracytoplasmic stress response.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1002302 
PMCID: PMC186437
PMID: 12183368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((argR) AND (fic)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 2000 Mar;146 ( Pt 3):581-589. doi:
10.1099/00221287-146-3-581.

Stability by multimer resolution of pJHCMW1 is due to the Tn1331 resolvase and
not to the Escherichia coli Xer system.

Tolmasky ME(1)(2), Colloms S(2), Blakely G(2), Sherratt DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Nutrition, Department of Biological
Science, School of Natural Science and Mathematics, California State University
Fullerton, Fullerton, CA 92834-6850, USA2.
(2)Microbiology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK1.

The plasmid pJHCMW1 encodes resistance to several aminoglycosides and
beta-lactams and consists of a copy of the transposon Tn1331, a region including 
the replication functions, and a sequence with homology to ColE1 cer, designated 
mwr. In this work, the role of this cer-like site in ensuring the stable
inheritance of pJHCMW1 by multimer resolution was studied. The Escherichia coli
Xer site-specific recombination system acts at sites such as ColE1 cer to resolve
plasmid multimers formed by homologous recombination, thereby maintaining
plasmids in a monomeric state and helping to ensure stable plasmid inheritance.
Despite its high similarity to ColE1 cer, the pJHCMW1 mwr was a poor substrate
for Xer recombination in E. coli and did not contribute significantly to plasmid 
stability. Instead, the Tn1331 co-integrate resolution system was highly active
at resolving pJHCMW1 multimers and ensured the stable inheritance of pJHCMW1.
Although Xer recombination at pJHCMW1 mwr was inefficient in E. coli, the
recombination that did occur was dependent on ArgR, PepA, XerC and XerD. A
supercoiled circular DNA molecule containing two pJHCMW1 mwr sites in direct
repeat yielded Holliday-junction-containing product when incubated with ArgR,
PepA, XerC and XerD in vitro, confirming that pJHCMW1 mwr is a functional
recombination site. However, unlike cer, some Holliday-junction-containing
product could be detected for mwr in the absence of ArgR, although addition of
this protein resulted in formation of more Holliday junctions. Binding
experiments demonstrated that XerD bound to pJHCMW1 mwr core with a high
affinity, but that XerC bound to this site very poorly, even in the presence of
XerD.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-146-3-581 
PMID: 10746761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dnaK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Sep;65(9):4181-8.

Bacterial growth state distinguished by single-cell protein profiling: does
chlorination kill coliforms in municipal effluent?

Rockabrand D(1), Austin T, Kaiser R, Blum P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588-0666, USA.

Municipal effluent is the largest reservoir of human enteric bacteria. Its public
health significance, however, depends upon the physiological status of the
wastewater bacterial community. A novel immunofluorescence assay was developed
and used to examine the bacterial growth state during wastewater disinfection.
Quantitative levels of three highly conserved cytosolic proteins (DnaK, Dps, and 
Fis) were determined by using enterobacterium-specific antibody
fluorochrome-coupled probes. Enterobacterial Fis homologs were abundant in
growing cells and nearly undetectable in stationary-phase cells. In contrast,
enterobacterial Dps homologs were abundant in stationary-phase cells but
virtually undetectable in growing cells. The range of variation in the abundance 
of both proteins was at least 100-fold as determined by Western blotting and
immunofluorescence analysis. Enterobacterial DnaK homologs were nearly invariant 
with growth state, enabling their use as permeabilization controls. The cellular 
growth states of individual enterobacteria in wastewater samples were determined 
by measurement of Fis, Dps, and DnaK abundance (protein profiling). Intermediate 
levels of Fis and Dps were evident and occurred in response to physiological
transitions. The results indicate that chlorination failed to kill coliforms but 
rather elicited nutrient starvation and a reversible nonculturable state. These
studies suggest that the current standard procedures for wastewater analysis
which rely on detection of culturable cells likely underestimate fecal coliform
content.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.65.9.4181-4188.1999 
PMCID: PMC99757
PMID: 10473432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dnaJ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (surA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (araC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030654. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Regulatory design governing progression of population growth phases in bacteria.

Martínez-Antonio A(1), Lomnitz JG, Sandoval S, Aldana M, Savageau MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ingeniería Genética, Cinvestav, Irapuato, Guanajuato, México. 
amartinez@ira.cinvestav.mx

It has long been noted that batch cultures inoculated with resting bacteria
exhibit a progression of growth phases traditionally labeled lag, exponential,
pre-stationary and stationary. However, a detailed molecular description of the
mechanisms controlling the transitions between these phases is lacking. A core
circuit, formed by a subset of regulatory interactions involving five global
transcription factors (FIS, HNS, IHF, RpoS and GadX), has been identified by
correlating information from the well- established transcriptional regulatory
network of Escherichia coli and genome-wide expression data from cultures in
these different growth phases. We propose a functional role for this circuit in
controlling progression through these phases. Two alternative hypotheses for
controlling the transition between the growth phases are first, a continuous
graded adjustment to changing environmental conditions, and second, a
discontinuous hysteretic switch at critical thresholds between growth phases. We 
formulate a simple mathematical model of the core circuit, consisting of
differential equations based on the power-law formalism, and show by mathematical
and computer-assisted analysis that there are critical conditions among the
parameters of the model that can lead to hysteretic switch behavior, which--if
validated experimentally--would suggest that the transitions between different
growth phases might be analogous to cellular differentiation. Based on these
provocative results, we propose experiments to test the alternative hypotheses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030654 
PMCID: PMC3283595
PMID: 22363461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2010 Apr;58(3):344-55. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00645.x. Epub 2010 Jan 28.

Autoactivation of the AggR regulator of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli in
vitro and in vivo.

Morin N(1), Tirling C, Ivison SM, Kaur AP, Nataro JP, Steiner TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Vaccine
Development, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) causes diarrhea in diverse populations 
worldwide. The AraC-like regulator AggR is a key virulence regulator in EAEC.
AggR-regulated genes include those encoding the Aggregative Adherence Fimbria,
the dispersin protein, and a type VI secretion system. This study characterizes
the regulation of the aggR promoter (P(aggR)). Using primer extension analysis,
the transcriptional start site of the aggR promoter was located 40 nucleotides
upstream of the translational start. P(aggR) was found to be autoregulated and
DNA footprinting revealed the presence of two AggR-binding sites: one upstream of
the transcriptional start site and one downstream. Additionally, P(aggR) was
found to be positively regulated by the DNA-binding protein FIS and negatively
regulated by the global regulator H-NS. To further understand this complex
regulation scheme, a bacterial luciferase reporter system was used with a mouse
model of EAEC colonization. This allowed for the in vivo measurement of P(aggR), 
P(fis), and P(hns) activity. EAEC present in the mouse intestine possessed
relatively high levels of P(fis) and P(aggR) activity and a low level of P(hns)
when compared with in vitro experiments. The data provide significant insights
into the regulation cascade leading to aggR expression in the mammalian intestine
during EAEC infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00645.x 
PMID: 20132305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (cra)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol. 2016;155:1-54. doi: 10.1007/10_2015_320.

Metabolic Regulation and Coordination of the Metabolism in Bacteria in Response
to a Variety of Growth Conditions.

Shimizu K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820-8502, Japan.
shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.
(2)Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata,
997-0017, Japan. shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.

Living organisms have sophisticated but well-organized regulation system. It is
important to understand the metabolic regulation mechanisms in relation to growth
environment for the efficient design of cell factories for biofuels and
biochemicals production. Here, an overview is given for carbon catabolite
regulation, nitrogen regulation, ion, sulfur, and phosphate regulations,
stringent response under nutrient starvation as well as oxidative stress
regulation, redox state regulation, acid-shock, heat- and cold-shock regulations,
solvent stress regulation, osmoregulation, and biofilm formation, and quorum
sensing focusing on Escherichia coli metabolism and others. The coordinated
regulation mechanisms are of particular interest in getting insight into the
principle which governs the cell metabolism. The metabolism is controlled by both
enzyme-level regulation and transcriptional regulation via transcription factors 
such as cAMP-Crp, Cra, Csr, Fis, P(II)(GlnB), NtrBC, CysB, PhoR/B, SoxR/S, Fur,
MarR, ArcA/B, Fnr, NarX/L, RpoS, and (p)ppGpp for stringent response, where the
timescales for enzyme-level and gene-level regulations are different. Moreover,
multiple regulations are coordinated by the intracellular metabolites, where
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), and acetyl-CoA
(AcCoA) play important roles for enzyme-level regulation as well as
transcriptional control, while α-ketoacids such as α-ketoglutaric acid (αKG),
pyruvate (PYR), and oxaloacetate (OAA) play important roles for the coordinated
regulation between carbon source uptake rate and other nutrient uptake rate such 
as nitrogen or sulfur uptake rate by modulation of cAMP via Cya.

DOI: 10.1007/10_2015_320 
PMID: 25712586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Metabolites. 2013 Dec 30;4(1):1-35. doi: 10.3390/metabo4010001.

Regulation Systems of Bacteria such as Escherichia coli in Response to Nutrient
Limitation and Environmental Stresses.

Shimizu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka, Iizuka 820-8502, Japan.
shimi@bio.kyutech.ac.jp.

An overview was made to understand the regulation system of a bacterial cell such
as Escherichia coli in response to nutrient limitation such as carbon, nitrogen, 
phosphate, sulfur, ion sources, and environmental stresses such as oxidative
stress, acid shock, heat shock, and solvent stresses. It is quite important to
understand how the cell detects environmental signals, integrate such
information, and how the cell system is regulated. As for catabolite regulation, 
F1,6B P (FDP), PEP, and PYR play important roles in enzyme level regulation
together with transcriptional regulation by such transcription factors as Cra,
Fis, CsrA, and cAMP-Crp. αKG plays an important role in the coordinated control
between carbon (C)- and nitrogen (N)-limitations, where αKG inhibits enzyme I
(EI) of phosphotransferase system (PTS), thus regulating the glucose uptake rate 
in accordance with N level. As such, multiple regulation systems are co-ordinated
for the cell synthesis and energy generation against nutrient limitations and
environmental stresses. As for oxidative stress, the TCA cycle both generates and
scavenges the reactive oxygen species (ROSs), where NADPH produced at ICDH and
the oxidative pentose phosphate pathways play an important role in coping with
oxidative stress. Solvent resistant mechanism was also considered for the
stresses caused by biofuels and biochemicals production in the cell.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo4010001 
PMCID: PMC4018673
PMID: 24958385 


3. J Bacteriol. 2007 Mar;189(6):2359-68. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Enhancement of the synthesis of RpoN, Cra, and H-NS by polyamines at the level of
translation in Escherichia coli cultured with glucose and glutamate.

Terui Y(1), Higashi K, Taniguchi S, Shigemasa A, Nishimura K, Yamamoto K,
Kashiwagi K, Ishihama A, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Proteins whose synthesis is enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation
were identified in a polyamine-requiring mutant cultured in the presence of 0.1% 
glucose and 0.02% glutamate instead of 0.4% glucose as an energy source. Under
these conditions, enhancement of cell growth by polyamines was almost the same as
that in the presence of 0.4% glucose. It was found that synthesis of RpoN, Cra,
and H-NS was enhanced by polyamines at the level of translation at the early
logarithmic phase of growth (A(540) of 0.15). The effects of polyamines on
synthesis of RpoN, H-NS, and Cra were due to the existence of unusual
Shine-Dalgarno sequences (RpoN and H-NS) and an inefficient GUG initiation codon 
(Cra) in their mRNAs. Thus, rpoN, cra, and hns genes were identified as new
members of the polyamine modulon. Because most of the polyamine modulon genes
thus far identified encode transcription factors (RpoS [sigma(38)], Cya, FecI
[sigma(18)], Fis, RpoN [sigma(54)], Cra, and H-NS), DNA microarray analysis of
mRNA expressed in cells was performed. At the early logarithmic phase of growth, 
a total of 97 species of mRNAs that were up-regulated by polyamines more than
twofold were under the control of seven polyamine modulon genes mentioned above.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01562-06 
PMCID: PMC1899374
PMID: 17220219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1999 Dec;181(23):7390-3.

Regulation of adhE (encoding ethanol oxidoreductase) by the Fis protein in
Escherichia coli.

Membrillo-Hernández J(1), Kwon O, De Wulf P, Finkel SE, Lin EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The adhE gene of Escherichia coli encodes a multifunctional ethanol
oxidoreductase whose expression is 10-fold higher under anaerobic than aerobic
conditions. Transcription of the gene is under the negative control of the Cra
(catabolite repressor-activator) protein, whereas translation of the adhE mRNA
requires processing by RNase III. In this report, we show that the expression of 
adhE also depends on the Fis (factor for inversion stimulation) protein. A strain
bearing a fis::kan null allele failed to grow anaerobically on glucose solely
because of inadequate adhE transcription. However, fis expression itself is not
under redox control. Sequence inspection of the adhE promoter revealed three
potential Fis binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis, using
purified Fis protein and adhE promoter DNA, showed three different complexes.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.23.7390-7393.1999 
PMCID: PMC103705
PMID: 10572146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (ftsZ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2021 Mar 8;203(7). pii: e00659-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00659-20. Print
2021 Mar 8.

TusA Is a Versatile Protein That Links Translation Efficiency to Cell Division in
Escherichia coli.

Yildiz T(1), Leimkühler S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology,
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany sleim@uni-potsdam.de.

To enable accurate and efficient translation, sulfur modifications are introduced
posttranscriptionally into nucleosides in tRNAs. The biosynthesis of tRNA sulfur 
modifications involves unique sulfur trafficking systems for the incorporation of
sulfur atoms in different nucleosides of tRNA. One of the proteins that is
involved in inserting the sulfur for 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine
(mnm5s2U34) modifications in tRNAs is the TusA protein. TusA, however, is a
versatile protein that is also involved in numerous other cellular pathways.
Despite its role as a sulfur transfer protein for the 2-thiouridine formation in 
tRNA, a fundamental role of TusA in the general physiology of Escherichia coli
has also been discovered. Poor viability, a defect in cell division, and a
filamentous cell morphology have been described previously for tusA-deficient
cells. In this report, we aimed to dissect the role of TusA for cell viability.
We were able to show that the lack of the thiolation status of wobble uridine
(U34) nucleotides present on Lys, Gln, or Glu in tRNAs has a major consequence on
the translation efficiency of proteins; among the affected targets are the
proteins RpoS and Fis. Both proteins are major regulatory factors, and the
deregulation of their abundance consequently has a major effect on the cellular
regulatory network, with one consequence being a defect in cell division by
regulating the FtsZ ring formation.IMPORTANCE More than 100 different
modifications are found in RNAs. One of these modifications is the mnm5s2U
modification at the wobble position 34 of tRNAs for Lys, Gln, and Glu. The
functional significance of U34 modifications is substantial since it restricts
the conformational flexibility of the anticodon, thus providing translational
fidelity. We show that in an Escherichia coli TusA mutant strain, involved in
sulfur transfer for the mnm5s2U34 thio modifications, the translation efficiency 
of RpoS and Fis, two major cellular regulatory proteins, is altered. Therefore,
in addition to the transcriptional regulation and the factors that influence
protein stability, tRNA modifications that ensure the translational efficiency
provide an additional crucial regulatory factor for protein synthesis.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00659-20 
PMCID: PMC8088512
PMID: 33526615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (lpxC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Mol Biol. 2014 Oct 23;426(21):3553-68. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.009. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

DNA recognition by a σ(54) transcriptional activator from Aquifex aeolicus.

Vidangos NK(1), Heideker J(1), Lyubimov A(1), Lamers M(1), Huo Y(2), Pelton
JG(3), Ton J(1), Gralla J(2), Berger J(1), Wemmer DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, MC-1460, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, Box 951569, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California, MC-1460, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA; Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address: dewemmer@berkeley.edu.

Transcription initiation by bacterial σ(54)-polymerase requires the action of a
transcriptional activator protein. Activators bind sequence-specifically upstream
of the transcription initiation site via a DNA-binding domain (DBD). The
structurally characterized DBDs from activators all belong to the Fis (factor for
inversion stimulation) family of helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins. We report
here structures of the free and DNA-bound forms of the DBD of NtrC4 (4DBD) from
Aquifex aeolicus, a member of the NtrC family of σ(54) activators. Two
NtrC4-binding sites were identified upstream (-145 and -85bp) from the start of
the lpxC gene, which is responsible for the first committed step in lipid A
biosynthesis. This is the first experimental evidence for σ(54) regulation in
lpxC expression. 4DBD was crystallized both without DNA and in complex with the
-145-binding site. The structures, together with biochemical data, indicate that 
NtrC4 binds to DNA in a manner that is similar to that of its close homolog, Fis.
The greater sequence specificity for the binding of 4DBD relative to Fis seems to
arise from a larger number of base-specific contacts contributing to affinity
than for Fis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.009 
PMCID: PMC4188747
PMID: 25158097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (pdhR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Aug 18;4:116. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116.

Integrative inference of gene-regulatory networks in Escherichia coli using
information theoretic concepts and sequence analysis.

Kaleta C(1), Göhler A, Schuster S, Jahreis K, Guthke R, Nikolajewa S.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology/Bioinformatics Group, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Beutenbergstr, 11a,
D-07745 Jena, Germany. christoph.kaleta@uni-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Although Escherichia coli is one of the best studied model organisms,
a comprehensive understanding of its gene regulation is not yet achieved. There
exist many approaches to reconstruct regulatory interaction networks from gene
expression experiments. Mutual information based approaches are most useful for
large-scale network inference.
RESULTS: We used a three-step approach in which we combined gene regulatory
network inference based on directed information (DTI) and sequence analysis. DTI 
values were calculated on a set of gene expression profiles from 19 time course
experiments extracted from the Many Microbes Microarray Database. Focusing on
influences between pairs of genes in which one partner encodes a transcription
factor (TF) we derived a network which contains 878 TF - gene interactions of
which 166 are known according to RegulonDB. Afterward, we selected a subset of
109 interactions that could be confirmed by the presence of a phylogenetically
conserved binding site of the respective regulator. By this second step, the
fraction of known interactions increased from 19% to 60%. In the last step, we
checked the 44 of the 109 interactions not yet included in RegulonDB for
functional relationships between the regulator and the target and, thus, obtained
ten TF - target gene interactions. Five of them concern the regulator LexA and
have already been reported in the literature. The remaining five influences
describe regulations by Fis (with two novel targets), PhdR, PhoP, and KdgR. For
the validation of our approach, one of them, the regulation of lipoate synthase
(LipA) by the pyruvate-sensing pyruvate dehydrogenate repressor (PdhR), was
experimentally checked and confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: We predicted a set of five novel TF - target gene interactions in E.
coli. One of them, the regulation of lipA by the transcriptional regulator PdhR
was validated experimentally. Furthermore, we developed DTInfer, a new R-package 
for the inference of gene-regulatory networks from microarrays using directed
information.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-116 
PMCID: PMC2936295
PMID: 20718955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Microbiol. 2007 Jun 8;7:53.

Identification of regulatory network topological units coordinating the
genome-wide transcriptional response to glucose in Escherichia coli.

Gutierrez-Ríos RM(1), Freyre-Gonzalez JA, Resendis O, Collado-Vides J, Saier M,
Gosset G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamentos de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apdo. Postal 510-3, Cuernavaca, Morelos,
México. rmaria@ibt.unam.mx

BACKGROUND: Glucose is the preferred carbon and energy source for Escherichia
coli. A complex regulatory network coordinates gene expression, transport and
enzyme activities in response to the presence of this sugar. To determine the
extent of the cellular response to glucose, we applied an approach combining
global transcriptome and regulatory network analyses.
RESULTS: Transcriptome data from isogenic wild type and crp- strains grown in
Luria-Bertani medium (LB) or LB + 4 g/L glucose (LB+G) were analyzed to identify 
differentially transcribed genes. We detected 180 and 200 genes displaying
increased and reduced relative transcript levels in the presence of glucose,
respectively. The observed expression pattern in LB was consistent with a
gluconeogenic metabolic state including active transport and interconversion of
small molecules and macromolecules, induction of protease-encoding genes and a
partial heat shock response. In LB+G, catabolic repression was detected for
transport and metabolic interconversion activities. We also detected an increased
capacity for de novo synthesis of nucleotides, amino acids and proteins. Cluster 
analysis of a subset of genes revealed that CRP mediates catabolite repression
for most of the genes displaying reduced transcript levels in LB+G, whereas Fis
participates in the upregulation of genes under this condition. An analysis of
the regulatory network, in terms of topological functional units, revealed 8
interconnected modules which again exposed the importance of Fis and CRP as
directly responsible for the coordinated response of the cell. This effect was
also seen with other not extensively connected transcription factors such as FruR
and PdhR, which showed a consistent response considering media composition.
CONCLUSION: This work allowed the identification of eight interconnected
regulatory network modules that includes CRP, Fis and other transcriptional
factors that respond directly or indirectly to the presence of glucose. In most
cases, each of these modules includes genes encoding physiologically related
functions, thus indicating a connection between regulatory network topology and
related cellular functions involved in nutrient sensing and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-7-53 
PMCID: PMC1905917
PMID: 17559662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 1998 Aug;144 ( Pt 8):2113-2123. doi:
10.1099/00221287-144-8-2113.

Transcription and transcript processing in the sdhCDAB-sucABCD operon of
Escherichia coli.

Cunningham L(1), Guest JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology, University of SheffieldWestern Bank, Sheffield S10 2TNUK.

The genes encoding succinate dehydrogenase (sdhCDAB), the specific components of 
the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (ODH, E1o and E2o; sucAB) and
succinyl-CoA synthetase (sucCD) form a cluster containing two promoters at 16.3
min in the chromosome of Escherichia coli: Psdh sdhCDAB-Psuc sucAB-sucCD. The
gene encoding the lipoamide dehydrogenase component of both the 2-oxoglutarate
and pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes (E3; lpdA) is the distal gene of another
cluster containing two promoters located at 2.7 min: Ppdh pdhR-aceEF-Plpd lpdA.
The responses of the suc and lpd promoters to different environmental conditions 
and to regulator defects were investigated with appropriate lacZ fusions, in
order to understand how expression of the sucAB genes is co-regulated with other 
genes in the sdhCDAB-sucABCD cluster and with lpdA expression. Expression from
the suc promoter was repressed by IHF and partially activated by sigma 38 but it 
was not regulated by ArcA, FNR, CRP, FruR or Fis, and not repressed by glucose or
anaerobiosis, indicating that the well-established catabolite and anaerobic
repression of ODH synthesis is imposed elsewhere. In contrast, the lpd promoter
was repressed by both glucose (via a CRP-independent mechanism) and anaerobiosis 
(mediated by ArcA), and activated by Fis, but it was not regulated by FNR, FruR, 
IHF or sigma 38. These observations support the view that transcription of the
sucABCD genes is primarily initiated and regulated at the upstream sdh promoter, 
and that the lpd promoter is independently co-regulated with Psdh (primarily by
ArcA-mediated repression) rather than with Psuc. Direct evidence for
co-transcription of the entire sdhCDAB-sucABCD region from Psdh was obtained by
detecting a 10 kb transcript in rnc and rne mutants, but not in the parental
strains. Three RNaseIII-specific processing sites, which contribute to the
extreme instability of the readthrough transcript, were identified in the
sdhCDAB-sucABCD intergenic region. Other sites of endonuclease processing were
located by interpreting the patterns of transcript subfragments observed in
Northern blotting.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-144-8-2113 
PMID: 9720032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dksA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS One. 2011 May 6;6(5):e19235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235.

The E. coli anti-sigma factor Rsd: studies on the specificity and regulation of
its expression.

Hofmann N(1), Wurm R, Wagner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Among the seven different sigma factors in E. coli σ(70) has the
highest concentration and affinity for the core RNA polymerase. The E. coli
protein Rsd is regarded as an anti-sigma factor, inhibiting σ(70)-dependent
transcription at the onset of stationary growth. Although binding of Rsd to σ(70)
has been shown and numerous structural studies on Rsd have been performed the
detailed mechanism of action is still unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have performed studies to unravel the function
and regulation of Rsd expression in vitro and in vivo. Cross-linking and affinity
binding revealed that Rsd is able to interact with σ(70), with the core enzyme of
RNA polymerase and is able to form dimers in solution. Unexpectedly, we find that
Rsd does also interact with σ(38), the stationary phase-specific sigma factor.
This interaction was further corroborated by gel retardation and footprinting
studies with different promoter fragments and σ(38)- or σ(70)-containing RNA
polymerase in presence of Rsd. Under competitive in vitro transcription
conditions, in presence of both sigma factors, a selective inhibition of
σ(70)-dependent transcription was prevailing, however. Analysis of rsd expression
revealed that the nucleoid-associated proteins H-NS and FIS, StpA and LRP bind to
the regulatory region of the rsd promoters. Furthermore, the major promoter P2
was shown to be down-regulated in vivo by RpoS, the stationary phase-specific
sigma factor and the transcription factor DksA, while induction of the stringent 
control enhanced rsd promoter activity. Most notably, the dam-dependent
methylation of a cluster of GATC sites turned out to be important for efficient
rsd transcription.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results contribute to a better understanding of the
intricate mechanism of Rsd-mediated sigma factor specificity changes during
stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019235 
PMCID: PMC3089606
PMID: 21573101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Aug;52(8):2718-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Role of global regulators and nucleotide metabolism in antibiotic tolerance in
Escherichia coli.

Hansen S(1), Lewis K, Vulić M.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Discovery Center and Department of Biology, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bacterial populations produce a small number of persister cells that exhibit
multidrug tolerance. Persister cells are largely responsible for the antibiotic
recalcitrance of biofilm infections. The mechanism of persister cell formation
largely remains unknown due to the challenges in identifying persister genes. We 
screened an ordered comprehensive library of 3,985 Escherichia coli knockout
strains to identify mutants with altered antibiotic tolerance. Stationary-state
cultures in 96-well plates were exposed to ofloxacin at a concentration which
allows only tolerant persister cells to survive. The persister cell level of each
culture was determined. A total of 150 mutants with decreased persistence were
identified in the initial screen, and subsequent validation confirmed that
neither the growth rate nor the ofloxacin MIC was affected for 10 of them. The
genes affected in these strains were dnaJ and dnaK (chaperones), apaH
(diadenosine tetraphosphatase), surA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), fis
and hns (global regulators), hnr (response regulator of RpoS), dksA
(transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription), ygfA
(5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase), and yigB (flavin mononucleotide [FMN]
phosphatase). The prominent presence of global regulators among these strains
pointed to the likely redundancy of persister cell formation mechanisms: the
elimination of a regulator controlling several redundant persister genes would be
expected to produce a phenotype. This observation is consistent with previous
findings for a possible role of redundant genes such as toxin/antitoxin modules
in persister cell formation. ygfA and yigB were of special interest. The
mammalian homolog of YgfA (methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase) catalyzes the
conversion of 5-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) into the rapidly degraded
5,10-methenyl-THF, depleting the folate pool. The YigB protein is a phosphatase
of FMN which would deplete the pool of this cofactor. Stochastic overexpression
of these genes could lead to dormancy and, hence, tolerance by depleting the
folate and FMN pools, respectively. Consistent with this scenario, the
overexpression of both genes produced increased tolerance to ofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00144-08 
PMCID: PMC2493092
PMID: 18519731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2006 Aug;188(16):5775-82.

DksA is required for growth phase-dependent regulation, growth rate-dependent
control, and stringent control of fis expression in Escherichia coli.

Mallik P(1), Paul BJ, Rutherford ST, Gourse RL, Osuna R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Albany, 1400 Washington
Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA.

DksA is a critical transcription factor in Escherichia coli that binds to RNA
polymerase and potentiates control of rRNA promoters and certain amino acid
promoters. Given the kinetic similarities between rRNA promoters and the fis
promoter (Pfis), we investigated the possibility that DksA might also control
transcription from Pfis. We show that the absence of dksA extends transcription
from Pfis well into the late logarithmic and stationary growth phases,
demonstrating the importance of DksA for growth phase-dependent regulation of
fis. We also show that transcription from Pfis increases with steady-state growth
rate and that dksA is absolutely required for this regulation. In addition, both 
DksA and ppGpp are required for inhibition of Pfis promoter activity following
amino acid starvation, and these factors act directly and synergistically to
negatively control Pfis transcription in vitro. DksA decreases the half-life of
the intrinsically short-lived fis promoter-RNA polymerase complex and increases
its sensitivity to the concentration of CTP, the predominant initiating
nucleotide triphosphate for this promoter. This work extends our understanding of
the multiple factors controlling fis expression and demonstrates the generality
of the DksA requirement for regulation of kinetically similar promoters.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00276-06 
PMCID: PMC1540068
PMID: 16885445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Sep;57(6):1636-52.

A genetic selection for supercoiling mutants of Escherichia coli reveals proteins
implicated in chromosome structure.

Hardy CD(1), Cozzarelli NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 16 Barker Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3204, USA.

Chromosomes are divided into topologically independent regions, called domains,
by the action of uncharacterized barriers. With the goal of identifying domain
barrier components, we designed a genetic selection for mutants with reduced
negative supercoiling of the Escherichia coli chromosome. We employed a strain
that contained two chromosomally located reporter genes under the control of a
supercoiling-sensitive promoter and used transposon mutagenesis to generate a
wide range of mutants. We subjected the selected mutants to a series of secondary
screens and identified five proteins as modulators of chromosomal supercoiling in
vivo. Three of these proteins: H-NS, Fis and DksA, have clear ties to chromosome 
biology. The other two proteins, phosphoglucomutase (Pgm) and transketolase
(TktA), are enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism and have not previously
been shown to affect DNA. Deletion of any of the identified genes specifically
affected chromosome topology, without affecting plasmid supercoiling. We suggest 
that at least H-NS, Fis and perhaps TktA assist directly in the supercoiling of
domains by forming topological barriers on the E. coli chromosome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04799.x 
PMID: 16135230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 2005 May;56(4):1087-102.

DksA represses ribosomal gene transcription in Pseudomonas aeruginosa by
interacting with RNA polymerase on ribosomal promoters.

Perron K(1), Comte R, van Delden C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Médecine Moléculaire, Centre Médical
Universitaire, Université de Genève, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

In Escherichia coli transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is regulated by the
H-NS and Fis proteins, as well as by the small signal molecule ppGpp and the
initiating nucleotides. During amino acid starvation, the concentration of ppGpp 
increases, and binding of this alarmone to RNA polymerase (RNAP) leads to
inhibition of rRNA transcription, a regulatory event called stringent response.
Here we show that in Pseudomonas aeruginosa DksA, a protein with pleiotropic
effects, is a negative regulator of rRNA transcription both during exponential
growth and stringent conditions. A dksA mutant overexpresses rRNA, without being 
affected in the production of ppGpp. Cell-fractionation and chromosome
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that DksA is associated with DNA, in 
particular with promoters of ribosomal genes in vivo. The binding to rRNA
promoters specifically increases during stringent response, and correlates with
the binding of RNAP to these regions. Moreover DksA can be copurified with RNAP
subunits in vivo. DNA band shift experiments show that DksA, in synergy with
ppGpp, increases the binding of RNAP to ribosomal promoters. Therefore DksA might
be a new regulator of rRNA transcription in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04597.x 
PMID: 15853892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (tgt)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Dec 15;25(24):4994-5002.

Information analysis of Fis binding sites.

Hengen PN(1), Bartram SL, Stewart LE, Schneider TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mathematical Biology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, PO Box B, Building 469, Room 144,
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

Originally discovered in the bacteriophage Mu DNA inversion system gin, Fis
(Factor for Inversion Stimulation) regulates many genetic systems. To determine
the base frequency conservation required for Fis to locate its binding sites, we 
collected a set of 60 experimentally defined wild-type Fis DNA binding sequences.
The sequence logo for Fis binding sites showed the significance and likely kinds 
of base contacts, and these are consistent with available experimental data.
Scanning with an information theory based weight matrix within fis, nrd, tgt/sec 
and gin revealed Fis sites not previously identified, but for which there are
published footprinting and biochemical data. DNA mobility shift experiments
showed that a site predicted to be 11 bases from the proximal Salmonella
typhimurium hin site and a site predicted to be 7 bases from the proximal P1 cin 
site are bound by Fis in vitro. Two predicted sites separated by 11 bp found
within the nrd promoter region, and one in the tgt/sec promoter, were also
confirmed by gel shift analysis. A sequence in aldB previously reported to be a
Fis site, for which information theory predicts no site, did not shift. These
results demonstrate that information analysis is useful for predicting Fis DNA
binding.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.24.4994 
PMCID: PMC147151
PMID: 9396807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Aug 25;20(16):4193-8.

The promoter of the tgt/sec operon in Escherichia coli is preceded by an upstream
activation sequence that contains a high affinity FIS binding site.

Slany RK(1), Kersten H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

The tgt/sec operon in E. coli consists of five genes: queA, tgt, ORF12, secD, and
secF. QueA and Tgt participate in the biosynthesis of the hypermodified t-RNA
nucleoside Queuosine, whereas SecD and SecF are involved in protein secretion.
Examination of the promoter region of the operon showed structural similarity to 
promoter regions of the rrn-operons. An upstream activation sequence (UAS)
containing a potential binding site for the factor of inversion stimulation (FIS)
was found. Gel retardation assays and DNaseI footprinting indicated, that FIS
binds specifically and with high affinity to a site centred at position -58.
Binding of FIS caused bending of the DNA, as deduced from circular permutation
analysis. Various 5' deletion mutants of the promoter region were constructed and
fused to a lacZ reporter gene to determine the influence of the UAS element on
the promoter strength. An approximately two-fold activation of the promoter by
the UAS element was observed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.16.4193 
PMCID: PMC334125
PMID: 1508713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (secD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Aug 25;20(16):4193-8.

The promoter of the tgt/sec operon in Escherichia coli is preceded by an upstream
activation sequence that contains a high affinity FIS binding site.

Slany RK(1), Kersten H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

The tgt/sec operon in E. coli consists of five genes: queA, tgt, ORF12, secD, and
secF. QueA and Tgt participate in the biosynthesis of the hypermodified t-RNA
nucleoside Queuosine, whereas SecD and SecF are involved in protein secretion.
Examination of the promoter region of the operon showed structural similarity to 
promoter regions of the rrn-operons. An upstream activation sequence (UAS)
containing a potential binding site for the factor of inversion stimulation (FIS)
was found. Gel retardation assays and DNaseI footprinting indicated, that FIS
binds specifically and with high affinity to a site centred at position -58.
Binding of FIS caused bending of the DNA, as deduced from circular permutation
analysis. Various 5' deletion mutants of the promoter region were constructed and
fused to a lacZ reporter gene to determine the influence of the UAS element on
the promoter strength. An approximately two-fold activation of the promoter by
the UAS element was observed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.16.4193 
PMCID: PMC334125
PMID: 1508713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (secF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Aug 25;20(16):4193-8.

The promoter of the tgt/sec operon in Escherichia coli is preceded by an upstream
activation sequence that contains a high affinity FIS binding site.

Slany RK(1), Kersten H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

The tgt/sec operon in E. coli consists of five genes: queA, tgt, ORF12, secD, and
secF. QueA and Tgt participate in the biosynthesis of the hypermodified t-RNA
nucleoside Queuosine, whereas SecD and SecF are involved in protein secretion.
Examination of the promoter region of the operon showed structural similarity to 
promoter regions of the rrn-operons. An upstream activation sequence (UAS)
containing a potential binding site for the factor of inversion stimulation (FIS)
was found. Gel retardation assays and DNaseI footprinting indicated, that FIS
binds specifically and with high affinity to a site centred at position -58.
Binding of FIS caused bending of the DNA, as deduced from circular permutation
analysis. Various 5' deletion mutants of the promoter region were constructed and
fused to a lacZ reporter gene to determine the influence of the UAS element on
the promoter strength. An approximately two-fold activation of the promoter by
the UAS element was observed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.16.4193 
PMCID: PMC334125
PMID: 1508713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (recF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Adv Biophys. 2004;38:3-20.

Illegitimate recombination mediated by double-strand break and end-joining in
Escherichia coli.

Ikeda H(1), Shiraishi K, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Medinet Inc, Tamagawadai 2-2-8, Setagaya-ku, 
Tokyo 158-0096, Japan. ikeda@medinet-inc.co.jp

The frequency of illegitimate recombination has been measured by a lambda bio
transducing phage assay during the induction of the E. coli lambda cI857 lysogen.
Illegitimate recombination falls into two classes, short homology-independent and
short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. The former involves
sequences with virtually no homology, and is mediated by DNA topoisomerases and
controlled by the DNA binding protein HU. The latter is induced by UV irradiation
or other DNA damaging agents and requires short regions of homology, usually
contain 4 to 13 base pairs, at sites involved in recombination. It has been shown
that the RecJ exonuclease promotes short homology-dependent illegitimate
recombination, but that the RecQ helicase suppresses it. In addition, we have
shown that the overexpression of RecE and RecT enhances the frequencies of
spontaneous and UV-induced illegitimate recombination and that the RecJ, RecF,
RecO, and RecR functions are required for this RecE-mediated illegitimate
recombination. Moreover, we have also indicated that RecQ plays a role in the
suppression of RecE-mediated illegitimate recombination, with the participation
of DnaB, Fis, ExoI, and H-NS. Models have been proposed for these modes of
recombination: the DNA gyrase subunit exchange model for short
homology-independent illegitimate recombination and the "double-strand break and 
join" model for short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. Many
features of these models remain to be tested in future studies.


PMID: 15493325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Adv Biophys. 2004;38(Complete):3-20.

Illegitimate recombination mediated by double-strand break and end-joining in
Escherichia coli.

Ikeda H(1), Shiraishi K, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Medinet Inc., Tamagawadai 2-2-8, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 158-0096, Japan.

The frequency of illegitimate recombination has been measured by a lambdabio
transducing phage assay during the induction of the E. coli lambda c1857 lysogen.
Illegitimate recombination falls into two classes, short homology-independent and
short homology-dependent illegitimate recombination. The former involves
sequences with virtually no homology, and is mediated by DNA topoisomerases and
controlled by the DNA binding protein HU. The latter is induced by UV irradiation
or other DNA damaging agents and requires short regions of homology, usually
contain 4 to 13 base pairs, at sites involved in recombination. It has been shown
that the RecJ exonuclease promotes short homology-dependent illegitimate
recombination, but that the RecQ helicase suppresses it. In addition, we have
shown that the overexpression of RecE and RecT enhances the frequencies of
spontaneous and UV-induced illegitimate recombination and that the RecJ, RecF,
RecO, and RecR functions are required for this RecE-mediated illegitimate
recombination. Moreover, we have also indicated that RecQ plays a role in the
suppression of RecEmediated illegitimate recombination, with the participation of
DnaB, Fis, Exol, and H-NS. Models have been proposed for these modes of
recombination: the DNA gyrase subunit exchange model for short
homology-independent illegitimate recombination and the "double-strand break and 
join" model for short homologydependent illegitimate recombination. Many features
of these models remain to be tested in future studies.


PMID: 15476890 


3. J Bacteriol. 1996 Oct;178(20):6006-12.

Fis binding in the dnaA operon promoter region.

Froelich JM(1), Phuong TK, Zyskind JW.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department and Molecular Biology Institute, San Diego State
University, California 92182-4614, USA.

The region between the rpmH and dnaA genes contains five promoters that
divergently express the ribosomal protein L34 and the proteins of the dnaA
operon, including DnaA, the beta clamp of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, and
RecF. The DNA-binding protein Fis was shown by the band shift assay to bind near 
the rpmHp2 and dnaAp2 promoters and by DNase I footprinting to bind to a single
site in the dnaAp2 promoter overlapping the -35 and spacer sequences. There were 
no observable differences in Fis affinity or the angle of bending induced by Fis 
between methylated and unmethylated DNA fragments containing the Fis binding site
in the dnaAp2 promoter. Fis directly or indirectly represses the expression of
DnaA protein and the beta clamp of DNA polymerase III. A fis null mutant
containing a dnaA-lacZ in-frame fusion had twofold greater beta-galactosidase
activity than a fis wild-type strain, and induced expression of Fis eliminated
the increase in activity of the fusion protein. A two- to threefold increase in
the levels of DnaA and beta clamp proteins was found in a fis null mutant by
immunoblot gel analysis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.178.20.6006-6012.1996 
PMCID: PMC178459
PMID: 8830699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (dnaA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Dec 16;49(22):12820-12835. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1171.

Negative feedback for DARS2-Fis complex by ATP-DnaA supports the cell
cycle-coordinated regulation for chromosome replication.

Miyoshi K(1), Tatsumoto Y(1), Ozaki S(1), Katayama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Kyushu University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

In Escherichia coli, the replication initiator DnaA oscillates between an ATP-
and an ADP-bound state in a cell cycle-dependent manner, supporting regulation
for chromosome replication. ATP-DnaA cooperatively assembles on the replication
origin using clusters of low-affinity DnaA-binding sites. After initiation,
DnaA-bound ATP is hydrolyzed, producing initiation-inactive ADP-DnaA. For the
next round of initiation, ADP-DnaA binds to the chromosomal locus DARS2, which
promotes the release of ADP, yielding the apo-DnaA to regain the initiation
activity through ATP binding. This DnaA reactivation by DARS2 depends on
site-specific binding of IHF (integration host factor) and Fis proteins and IHF
binding to DARS2 occurs specifically during pre-initiation. Here, we reveal that 
Fis binds to an essential region in DARS2 specifically during pre-initiation.
Further analyses demonstrate that ATP-DnaA, but not ADP-DnaA, oligomerizes on a
cluster of low-affinity DnaA-binding sites overlapping the Fis-binding region,
which competitively inhibits Fis binding and hence the DARS2 activity. DiaA (DnaA
initiator-associating protein) stimulating ATP-DnaA assembly enhances the
dissociation of Fis. These observations lead to a negative feedback model where
the activity of DARS2 is repressed around the time of initiation by the elevated 
ATP-DnaA level and is stimulated following initiation when the ATP-DnaA level is 
reduced.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1171 
PMCID: PMC8682772
PMID: 34871419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 20;12:732270. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.732270.
eCollection 2021.

Blocking, Bending, and Binding: Regulation of Initiation of Chromosome
Replication During the Escherichia coli Cell Cycle by Transcriptional Modulators 
That Interact With Origin DNA.

Grimwade JE(1), Leonard AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genetics Laboratory, Biological Sciences Program, Department of
Biomedical and Chemical Engineering and Sciences, Florida Institute of
Technology, Melbourne, FL, United States.

Genome duplication is a critical event in the reproduction cycle of every cell.
Because all daughter cells must inherit a complete genome, chromosome replication
is tightly regulated, with multiple mechanisms focused on controlling when
chromosome replication begins during the cell cycle. In bacteria, chromosome
duplication starts when nucleoprotein complexes, termed orisomes, unwind
replication origin (oriC) DNA and recruit proteins needed to build new
replication forks. Functional orisomes comprise the conserved initiator protein, 
DnaA, bound to a set of high and low affinity recognition sites in oriC. Orisomes
must be assembled each cell cycle. In Escherichia coli, the organism in which
orisome assembly has been most thoroughly examined, the process starts with DnaA 
binding to high affinity sites after chromosome duplication is initiated, and
orisome assembly is completed immediately before the next initiation event, when 
DnaA interacts with oriC's lower affinity sites, coincident with origin
unwinding. A host of regulators, including several transcriptional modulators,
targets low affinity DnaA-oriC interactions, exerting their effects by DNA
bending, blocking access to recognition sites, and/or facilitating binding of
DnaA to both DNA and itself. In this review, we focus on orisome assembly in E.
coli. We identify three known transcriptional modulators, SeqA, Fis (factor for
inversion stimulation), and IHF (integration host factor), that are not essential
for initiation, but which interact directly with E. coli oriC to regulate orisome
assembly and replication initiation timing. These regulators function by blocking
sites (SeqA) and bending oriC DNA (Fis and IHF) to inhibit or facilitate
cooperative low affinity DnaA binding. We also examine how the growth rate
regulation of Fis levels might modulate IHF and DnaA binding to oriC under a
variety of nutritional conditions. Combined, the regulatory mechanisms mediated
by transcriptional modulators help ensure that at all growth rates, bacterial
chromosome replication begins once, and only once, per cell cycle.

Copyright © 2021 Grimwade and Leonard.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.732270 
PMCID: PMC8488378
PMID: 34616385 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this work was done in
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a conflict of interest.


3. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 7;12:677812. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.677812.
eCollection 2021.

Membrane Stress Caused by Unprocessed Outer Membrane Lipoprotein Intermediate
Pro-Lpp Affects DnaA and Fis-Dependent Growth.

Patil D(1), Xun D(1), Schueritz M(1), Bansal S(2), Cheema A(2), Crooke E(1)(2),
Saxena R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States.
(2)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington DC, United States.

In Escherichia coli, repression of phosphatidylglycerol synthase A gene (pgsA)
lowers the levels of membrane acidic phospholipids, particularly
phosphatidylglycerol (PG), causing growth-arrested phenotype. The interrupted
synthesis of PG is known to be associated with concomitant reduction of
chromosomal content and cell mass, in addition to accumulation of unprocessed
outer membrane lipoprotein intermediate, pro-Lpp, at the inner membrane. However,
whether a linkage exists between the two altered-membrane outcomes remains
unknown. Previously, it has been shown that pgsA + cells overexpressing mutant
Lpp(C21G) protein have growth defects similar to those caused by the unprocessed 
pro-Lpp intermediate in cells lacking PG. Here, we found that the ectopic
expression of DnaA(L366K) or deletion of fis (encoding Factor for Inversion
Stimulation) permits growth of cells that otherwise would be arrested for growth 
due to accumulated Lpp(C21G). The DnaA(L366K)-mediated restoration of growth
occurs by reduced expression of Lpp(C21G) via a σ E -dependent small-regulatory
RNA (sRNA), MicL-S. In contrast, restoration of growth via fis deletion is only
partially dependent on the MicL-S pathway; deletion of fis also rescues Lpp(C21G)
growth arrest in cells lacking physiological levels of PG and cardiolipin (CL),
independently of MicL-S. Our results suggest a close link between the
physiological state of the bacterial cell membrane and DnaA- and Fis-dependent
growth.

Copyright © 2021 Patil, Xun, Schueritz, Bansal, Cheema, Crooke and Saxena.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.677812 
PMCID: PMC8216713
PMID: 34163454 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


4. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jul 26;9:1673. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01673. eCollection
2018.

Low Affinity DnaA-ATP Recognition Sites in E. coli oriC Make Non-equivalent and
Growth Rate-Dependent Contributions to the Regulated Timing of Chromosome
Replication.

Rao P(1), Rozgaja TA(2), Alqahtani A(1), Grimwade JE(1), Leonard AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne,
FL, United States.
(2)AREVA Med, Plano, TX, United States.

Although the mechanisms that precisely time initiation of chromosome replication 
in bacteria remain unclear, most clock models are based on accumulation of the
active initiator protein, DnaA-ATP. During each cell division cycle, sufficient
DnaA-ATP must become available to interact with a distinct set of low affinity
recognition sites in the unique chromosomal replication origin, oriC, and
assemble the pre-replicative complex (orisome) that unwinds origin DNA and helps 
load the replicative helicase. The low affinity oriC-DnaA-ATP interactions are
required for the orisome's mechanical functions, and may also play a role in
timing of new rounds of DNA synthesis. To further examine this possibility, we
constructed chromosomal oriCs with equal preference for DnaA-ADP or DnaA-ATP at
one or more low affinity recognition sites, thereby lowering the DnaA-ATP
requirement for orisome assembly, and measured the effect of the mutations on
cell cycle timing of DNA synthesis. Under slow growth conditions, mutation of any
one of the six low affinity DnaA-ATP sites in chromosomal oriC resulted in
initiation earlier in the cell cycle, but the shift was not equivalent for every 
recognition site. Mutation of τ2 caused a greater change in initiation age,
suggesting its occupation by DnaA-ATP is a temporal bottleneck during orisome
assembly. In contrast, during rapid growth, all origins with a single mutated
site displayed wild-type initiation timing. Based on these observations, we
propose that E. coli uses two different, DnaA-ATP-dependent initiation timing
mechanisms; a slow growth timer that is directly coupled to individual site
occupation, and a fast growth timer comprising DnaA-ATP and additional factors
that regulate DnaA access to oriC. Analysis of origins with paired mutated sites 
suggests that Fis is an important component of the fast growth timing mechanism.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01673 
PMCID: PMC6070618
PMID: 30093890 


5. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Aug 27;62(9). pii: e00806-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00806-18. Print 2018 Sep.

Genes and Proteins Involved in qnrS1 Induction.

Monárrez R(1), Wang Y(1), Fu Y(1)(2), Liao CH(1)(3), Okumura R(1)(4), Braun
MR(1), Jacoby GA(5), Hooper DC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Heilongjiang Provincial Key Laboratory for
Infection and Immunity, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(3)Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Biological Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA dhooper@mgh.harvard.edu.

Expression of the quinolone resistance gene qnrS1 is increased by quinolones, but
unlike induction of some other qnr genes, the bacterial SOS system is not
involved and no lexA box is found upstream. Nonetheless, at least 205 bp of
upstream sequence is required for induction to take place. An upstream sequence
bound to beads trapped potential binding proteins from cell extracts that were
identified by mass spectrometry as Dps, Fis, Ihf, Lrp, CysB, and YjhU. To further
elucidate their role, a reporter plasmid linking the qnrS1 upstream sequence to
lacZ was introduced into cells of the Keio collection with single-gene deletions 
and screened for lacZ expression. Mutants in ihfA and ihfB had decreased lacZ
induction, while induction in a cysB mutant was increased and dps, fis, lrp,
yjhU, and other mutants showed no change. The essential upstream sequence
contains potential binding sites for Ihf and DnaA. A dnaA deletion could not be
tested because it provides essential functions in cell replication; however,
increased dnaA expression decreased qnrS1 induction while decreased dnaA
expression enhanced it, implying a role for DnaA as a repressor. In a mobility
shift assay, purified IhfA, IhfB, and DnaA proteins (but not CysB) were shown to 
bind to the upstream segment. Induction decreased in a gyrA quinolone-resistant
mutant, indicating that GyrA also has a role. Thus, quinolones acting through
proteins DnaA, GyrA, IhfA, and IhfB regulate expression of qnrS1.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00806-18 
PMCID: PMC6125508
PMID: 29914953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Genes Cells. 2016 Sep;21(9):1015-23. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12395. Epub 2016 Jul 25.

Chromosomal location of the DnaA-reactivating sequence DARS2 is important to
regulate timely initiation of DNA replication in Escherichia coli.

Inoue Y(1), Tanaka H(1), Kasho K(1), Fujimitsu K(1), Oshima T(2), Katayama T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Division of Genomics of Bacterial Cell Functions, Graduate School of
Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara,
630-0192, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. katayama@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

In Escherichia coli, the initiator protein ATP-DnaA promotes initiation of
chromosome replication in a timely manner. After initiation, DnaA-bound ATP is
hydrolyzed to yield ADP-DnaA, which is inactive in initiation. DnaA-reactivating 
sequences (DARS1 and DARS2) on the chromosome have predominant roles in catalysis
of nucleotide exchange, producing ATP-DnaA from ADP-DnaA, which is prerequisite
for timely initiation. Both DARS sequences have a core region containing a
cluster of three DnaA-binding sites. DARS2 is more effective in vivo than DARS1, 
and timely activation of DARS2 depends on binding of two nucleoid-associated
proteins, IHF and Fis. DARS2 is located centrally between the chromosomal
replication origin oriC and the terminus region terC. We constructed mutants in
which DARS2 was translocated to several chromosomal loci, including sites
proximal to oriC and to terC. Replication initiation was inhibited in cells in
which DARS2 was translocated to terC-proximal sites when the cells were grown at 
42 °C, although overall binding efficiency of IHF and Fis to the translocated
DARS2 was not affected. Inhibition was largely sustained even in cells lacking
MatP, a DNA-binding protein responsible for terC-specific subchromosomal
structure. These results suggest that functional regulation of DARS2 is
correlated with its chromosomal location under certain conditions.

© 2016 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12395 
PMID: 27452301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 1;42(21):13134-49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1051. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Timely binding of IHF and Fis to DARS2 regulates ATP-DnaA production and
replication initiation.

Kasho K(1), Fujimitsu K(1), Matoba T(1), Oshima T(2), Katayama T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Division of Genomics of Bacterial Cell Functions, Graduate School of
Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara
630-0192, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan katayama@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

In Escherichia coli, the ATP-bound form of DnaA (ATP-DnaA) promotes replication
initiation. During replication, the bound ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP to yield the
ADP-bound form (ADP-DnaA), which is inactive for initiation. The chromosomal site
DARS2 facilitates the regeneration of ATP-DnaA by catalyzing nucleotide exchange 
between free ATP and ADP bound to DnaA. However, the regulatory mechanisms
governing this exchange reaction are unclear. Here, using in vitro reconstituted 
experiments, we show that two nucleoid-associated proteins, IHF and Fis, bind
site-specifically to DARS2 to activate coordinately the exchange reaction. The
regenerated ATP-DnaA was fully active in replication initiation and underwent
DnaA-ATP hydrolysis. ADP-DnaA formed heteromultimeric complexes with IHF and Fis 
on DARS2, and underwent nucleotide dissociation more efficiently than ATP-DnaA.
Consistently, mutant analyses demonstrated that specific binding of IHF and Fis
to DARS2 stimulates the formation of ATP-DnaA production, thereby promoting
timely initiation. Moreover, we show that IHF-DARS2 binding is temporally
regulated during the cell cycle, whereas Fis only binds to DARS2 in exponentially
growing cells. These results elucidate the regulation of ATP-DnaA and replication
initiation in coordination with the cell cycle and growth phase.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1051 
PMCID: PMC4245941
PMID: 25378325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Mar;91(6):1148-63. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12525. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Building the bacterial orisome: high-affinity DnaA recognition plays a role in
setting the conformation of oriC DNA.

Kaur G(1), Vora MP, Czerwonka CA, Rozgaja TA, Grimwade JE, Leonard AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 West
University Boulevard, Melbourne, FL, 32901, USA.

During assembly of the E. coli pre-replicative complex (pre-RC), initiator DnaA
oligomers are nucleated from three widely separated high-affinity DnaA
recognition sites in oriC. Oligomer assembly is then guided by low-affinity DnaA 
recognition sites, but is also regulated by a switch-like conformational change
in oriC mediated by sequential binding of two DNA bending proteins, Fis and IHF, 
serving as inhibitor and activator respectively. Although their recognition sites
are separated by up to 90 bp, Fis represses IHF binding and weak DnaA
interactions until accumulating DnaA displaces Fis from oriC. It remains unclear 
whether high-affinity DnaA binding plays any role in Fis repression at a distance
and it is also not known whether all high-affinity DnaA recognition sites play an
equivalent role in oligomer formation. To examine these issues, we developed
origin-selective recombineering methods to mutate E. coli chromosomal oriC. We
found that, although oligomers were assembled in the absence of any individual
high-affinity DnaA binding site, loss of DnaA binding at peripheral sites
eliminated Fis repression, and made binding of both Fis and IHF essential. We
propose a model in which interaction of DnaA molecules at high-affinity sites
regulates oriC DNA conformation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12525 
PMCID: PMC3992943
PMID: 24443848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2013 Sep;195(18):4255-63. doi: 10.1128/JB.00490-13. Epub 2013 Jul
19.

H-NS is a novel transcriptional modulator of the ribonucleotide reductase genes
in Escherichia coli.

Cendra Mdel M(1), Juárez A, Madrid C, Torrents E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, Cellular Biotechnology, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) are essential enzymes for DNA synthesis because 
they are responsible for the production of the four deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs) 
from their corresponding ribonucleotides. Escherichia coli contains two classes
of aerobic RNRs, encoded by the nrdAB (class Ia) and nrdHIEF (class Ib) operons, 
and a third RNR class, which is functional under anaerobic conditions and is
encoded by the nrdDG (class III) operon. Because cellular imbalances in the
amounts of the four dNTPs cause an increase in the rate of mutagenesis, the
activity and the expression of RNRs must be tightly regulated during bacterial
chromosome replication. The transcriptional regulation of these genes requires
several transcription factors (including DnaA, IciA, FIS [factor for inversion
stimulation], Fnr, Fur, and NrdR), depending on the RNR class; however, the
factors that dictate the expression of some RNR genes in response to different
environmental conditions are not known. We show that H-NS modulates the
expression of the nrdAB and nrdDG operons. H-NS represses expression both in
aerobically and in anaerobically growing cells. Under aerobic conditions,
repression occurs at the exponential phase of growth as well as at the transition
from the exponential to the stationary phase, a period when no dNTPs are needed. 
Under anoxic conditions, repression occurs mainly in exponentially growing cells.
Electrophoretic mobility assays performed with two DNA fragments from the
regulatory region of the nrdAB operon demonstrated the direct interaction of H-NS
with these sequences.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00490-13 
PMCID: PMC3754748
PMID: 23873909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 2009 Oct;191(19):6094-104. doi: 10.1128/JB.00672-09. Epub 2009 Jul
24.

Downregulation of the Escherichia coli guaB promoter by upstream-bound cyclic AMP
receptor protein.

Husnain SI(1), Busby SJ, Thomas MS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.

The Escherichia coli guaB promoter (P(guaB)) is responsible for directing
transcription of the guaB and guaA genes, which specify the biosynthesis of the
nucleotide GMP. P(guaB) is subject to growth rate-dependent control (GRDC) and
possesses an UP element that is required for this regulation. In addition,
P(guaB) contains a discriminator, three binding sites for the nucleoid-associated
protein FIS, and putative binding sites for the regulatory proteins DnaA, PurR,
and cyclic AMP receptor protein (CRP). Here we show that the CRP-cyclic AMP
(cAMP) complex binds to a site located over 100 bp upstream of the guaB
transcription start site, where it serves to downregulate P(guaB). The
CRP-mediated repression of P(guaB) activity increases in media that support lower
growth rates. Inactivation of the crp or cyaA gene or ablation/translocation of
the CRP site relieves repression by CRP and results in a loss of GRDC of P(guaB).
Thus, GRDC of P(guaB) involves a progressive increase in CRP-mediated repression 
of the promoter as the growth rate decreases. Our results also suggest that the
CRP-cAMP complex does not direct GRDC at P(guaB) and that at least one other
regulatory factor is required for conferring GRDC on this promoter. However, PurR
and DnaA are not required for this regulatory mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00672-09 
PMCID: PMC2747903
PMID: 19633076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fis) AND (purH)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEBS Lett. 2020 Mar;594(5):791-798. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13643. Epub 2019 Nov
14.

Fis protein forms DNA topological barriers to confine transcription-coupled DNA
supercoiling in Escherichia coli.

Dages S(1), Zhi X(1), Leng F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Institute and Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,
Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.

Previously, we demonstrated that transcription-coupled DNA supercoiling (TCDS)
potently activated or inhibited nearby promoters in Escherichia coli even in the 
presence of all four DNA topoisomerases, suggesting that DNA topoisomerases are
not the only factors regulating TCDS. A different mechanism exists to confine
this localized DNA supercoiling. Using an in vivo system containing the
TCDS-activated leu-500 promoter (Pleu-500 ), we find that the nucleoid-associated
Fis protein potently inhibits the TCDS-mediated activation of Pleu-500 . We also 
find that deletion of the fis gene significantly enhances TCDS-mediated
inhibition of transcription of three genes purH, yieP, and yrdA divergently
coupled to different rrn operons in the early log phase. These results suggest
that Fis protein forms DNA topological barriers upon binding to its recognition
sites, blocks TCDS diffusion, and potently inhibits the TCDS-activated Pleu-500 .

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13643 
PMID: 31639222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((envR) AND (acrR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Sep;190(18):6276-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.00190-08. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

AcrS/EnvR represses expression of the acrAB multidrug efflux genes in Escherichia
coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Takumi-Kobayashi A, Theisen U, Hirata T, Nishino K, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

The acrS regulatory gene is located upstream of the acrEF multidrug efflux system
genes. However, the roles of AcrS in regulation of drug efflux pumps have not
been clearly understood. Here we show that AcrS represses other multidrug efflux 
genes, acrAB, which encode a major efflux system in Escherichia coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00190-08 
PMCID: PMC2546796
PMID: 18567659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1995 Nov;177(21):6111-7.

Regulation of jadomycin B production in Streptomyces venezuelae ISP5230:
involvement of a repressor gene, jadR2.

Yang K(1), Han L, Vining LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dallhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The nucleotide sequence of a region upstream of the type II polyketide synthase
genes in the cluster for biosynthesis of the polyketide antibiotic jadomycin B in
Streptomyces venezuelae contained an open reading frame encoding a sequence of
196 amino acids that resembeled sequences deduced for a group of repressor
proteins. The strongest similarity was to EnvR of Escherichia coli, but the
sequence also resembled MtrR, AcrR, TetC, and TcmR, all of which are involved in 
regulating resistance to antibiotics or toxic hydrophobic substances in the
environment. Disruption of the nucleotide sequence of this putative S. venezuelae
repressor gene (jadR2), by insertion of an apramycin resistance gene at an
internal MluI site, and replacement of the chromosomal gene generated mutants
that produced jadomycin B without the stress treatments (exposure to heat shock
or to toxic concentrations of ethanol) required for jadomycin B production by the
wild type. When cultures of the disruption mutants were ethanol stressed, they
overproduced the antibiotic. From these results it was concluded that expression 
of the jadomycin B biosynthesis genes are negatively regulated by jadR2.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.21.6111-6117.1995 
PMCID: PMC177450
PMID: 7592375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((zntR) AND (copA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Jun;102(11):4863-4872. doi:
10.1007/s00253-018-8960-2. Epub 2018 Apr 7.

Modulating the sensing properties of Escherichia coli-based bioreporters for
cadmium and mercury.

Kang Y(1), Lee W(1), Jang G(2), Kim BG(3), Yoon Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute of Agriculture
and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department Forest Resources, Gyeongnam National University of Science and
Technology, 33 Dongjin-ro, Jinju-si, Gyeongsangman-do, 52725, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. yyoon21@gmail.com.

Despite the large number of bioreporters developed to date, the ability to detect
heavy metal(loid)s with bioreporters has thus far been limited owing to the lack 
of appropriate genetic systems. We here present a novel approach to modulate the 
selectivity and sensitivity of microbial whole-cell bioreporters (WCBs) for
sensing metal(loid)s via the znt-operon from Escherichia coli, which were applied
to quantify the bioavailability of these contaminants in environmental samples.
The WCB harboring the fusion gene zntAp::egfp was used as a microbial metal(loid)
sensor, which was turned on by the interaction between ZntR and metal(loid) ions.
This design makes it possible to modulate the selectivity and sensitivity to
metal(loid)s simply by changing the metal-binding property of ZntR and by
disrupting the metal efflux system of E. coli, respectively. In fact, the E. coli
cell-based bioreporter harboring zntAp::egfp showed multi-target responses to
Cd(II), Hg(II), and Zn(II). However, the WCBs showed responses toward only Cd(II)
and Hg(II) when the amino acid sequence of the metal-binding loop of ZntR was
changed to CNHEPGTVCPIC and CPGDDSADC, respectively. Moreover, the sensitivity
toward both Cd(II) and Hg(II) was enhanced when copA, which is known to export
copper and silver, was deleted. Thus, our findings provide a strong foundation
for expanding the target of WCBs from the currently limited number of genetic
systems available.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-8960-2 
PMID: 29627854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Oct 8;125(40):12088-9.

An atypical linear Cu(I)-S2 center constitutes the high-affinity metal-sensing
site in the CueR metalloregulatory protein.

Chen K(1), Yuldasheva S, Penner-Hahn JE, O'Halloran TV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208,
USA.

CueR is a copper-responsive genetic switch that regulates transcription of genes 
encoding the primary copper-exporting system in E. coli, CopA and CueO. Although 
a member of the MerR family of regulatory proteins, CueR has four cysteines in an
array that is distinct from those in Hg(II)-sensing MerR or in Zn-sensing ZntR. A
recent crystal structure showed one copper atom in CueR bound to cysteines Cys112
and Cys120 in a linear CuS2 structure, but left open the questions of whether the
other half of the CueR dimer has the same structure, and of whether these
structures depend on the two additional C-terminal cysteines. Metal binding,
transcription runoff, and cysteine modification studies show that only Cys112 and
Cys 120 are necessary and sufficient to make the transcriptionally active
Cu-sensing site. X-ray absorption spectroscopy shows that this site binds Cu(I)
in a strictly linear CuS2 site in solution, a structure that is rarely observed
in copper proteins. This structure does not depend either on additional metal
loading or upon the presence of additional C-terminal cysteine ligands and is
well suited for an ultrasensitve receptor site that discriminates against the
binding of other metal ions.

DOI: 10.1021/ja036070y 
PMID: 14518983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((zntR) AND (copA;copA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Jun;102(11):4863-4872. doi:
10.1007/s00253-018-8960-2. Epub 2018 Apr 7.

Modulating the sensing properties of Escherichia coli-based bioreporters for
cadmium and mercury.

Kang Y(1), Lee W(1), Jang G(2), Kim BG(3), Yoon Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute of Agriculture
and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department Forest Resources, Gyeongnam National University of Science and
Technology, 33 Dongjin-ro, Jinju-si, Gyeongsangman-do, 52725, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Environmental Health Science, Konkuk University, 120
Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 05029, Republic of Korea. yyoon21@gmail.com.

Despite the large number of bioreporters developed to date, the ability to detect
heavy metal(loid)s with bioreporters has thus far been limited owing to the lack 
of appropriate genetic systems. We here present a novel approach to modulate the 
selectivity and sensitivity of microbial whole-cell bioreporters (WCBs) for
sensing metal(loid)s via the znt-operon from Escherichia coli, which were applied
to quantify the bioavailability of these contaminants in environmental samples.
The WCB harboring the fusion gene zntAp::egfp was used as a microbial metal(loid)
sensor, which was turned on by the interaction between ZntR and metal(loid) ions.
This design makes it possible to modulate the selectivity and sensitivity to
metal(loid)s simply by changing the metal-binding property of ZntR and by
disrupting the metal efflux system of E. coli, respectively. In fact, the E. coli
cell-based bioreporter harboring zntAp::egfp showed multi-target responses to
Cd(II), Hg(II), and Zn(II). However, the WCBs showed responses toward only Cd(II)
and Hg(II) when the amino acid sequence of the metal-binding loop of ZntR was
changed to CNHEPGTVCPIC and CPGDDSADC, respectively. Moreover, the sensitivity
toward both Cd(II) and Hg(II) was enhanced when copA, which is known to export
copper and silver, was deleted. Thus, our findings provide a strong foundation
for expanding the target of WCBs from the currently limited number of genetic
systems available.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-8960-2 
PMID: 29627854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Adv Microb Physiol. 2011;58:175-232. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381043-4.00005-2.

Metal sensing in Salmonella: implications for pathogenesis.

Osman D(1), Cavet JS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Both the essentiality and toxicity of transition metals are exploited as part of 
mammalian immune defenses against bacterial infection. Salmonella serovars
continue to cause serious medical and veterinary problems worldwide and detecting
deficiency and excess of different metal ions (such as copper, iron, zinc,
manganese, nickel, and cobalt) is fundamental to their virulence. This involves
multiple DNA-binding metal-responsive transcription factors that discriminate
between elements and trigger expression of genes that mediate appropriate
responses to metal fluxes. This review focuses on the metal stresses encountered 
by Salmonella during infection and the roles of the different metal-sensing
regulatory proteins and their target genes in adapting to these changing metal
levels. Current knowledge regarding the mechanisms of metal-regulated gene
expression and the structural features of sensory metal binding sites are
described. In addition, the principles governing the ability of the different
sensors to detect specific metals within a cell to control cytosolic metal levels
are also discussed. These proteins represent potential targets for the
development of new therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381043-4.00005-2 
PMID: 21722794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Oct 8;125(40):12088-9.

An atypical linear Cu(I)-S2 center constitutes the high-affinity metal-sensing
site in the CueR metalloregulatory protein.

Chen K(1), Yuldasheva S, Penner-Hahn JE, O'Halloran TV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208,
USA.

CueR is a copper-responsive genetic switch that regulates transcription of genes 
encoding the primary copper-exporting system in E. coli, CopA and CueO. Although 
a member of the MerR family of regulatory proteins, CueR has four cysteines in an
array that is distinct from those in Hg(II)-sensing MerR or in Zn-sensing ZntR. A
recent crystal structure showed one copper atom in CueR bound to cysteines Cys112
and Cys120 in a linear CuS2 structure, but left open the questions of whether the
other half of the CueR dimer has the same structure, and of whether these
structures depend on the two additional C-terminal cysteines. Metal binding,
transcription runoff, and cysteine modification studies show that only Cys112 and
Cys 120 are necessary and sufficient to make the transcriptionally active
Cu-sensing site. X-ray absorption spectroscopy shows that this site binds Cu(I)
in a strictly linear CuS2 site in solution, a structure that is rarely observed
in copper proteins. This structure does not depend either on additional metal
loading or upon the presence of additional C-terminal cysteine ligands and is
well suited for an ultrasensitve receptor site that discriminates against the
binding of other metal ions.

DOI: 10.1021/ja036070y 
PMID: 14518983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (purE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):672-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302770. Epub 2013
Dec 12.

Infusion of pharmaceutical-grade natural human C-reactive protein is not
proinflammatory in healthy adult human volunteers.

Lane T(1), Wassef N, Poole S, Mistry Y, Lachmann HJ, Gillmore JD, Hawkins PN,
Pepys MB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit, and the National Amyloidosis Centre,
Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Division of Medicine, University
College London, London, United Kingdom (M.B.P., T.L., H.J.L., J.D.G., P.N.H.);
Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom 
(N.W.); and the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Potters 
Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom (S.P., Y.M.).

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):594-5.
    Circ Res. 2014 Feb 14;114(4):596-7.

RATIONALE: Baseline circulating concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) are
significantly associated with cardiovascular disease risk in general populations.
This modest association has been inappropriately conflated with causality, and it
has been claimed that CRP is proatherogenic. Most of the known causative factors 
for atherosclerosis stimulate increased CRP production, but comprehensive genetic
epidemiology studies provide no support for a pathogenic role of CRP. The
reported proinflammatory effects of human CRP preparations on healthy cells in
vitro and in healthy animals in vivo have all been produced by poorly
characterized CRP preparations, demonstrably caused by impurities, or elicited by
CRP made in recombinant Escherichia coli not by humans. None of the in vitro or
animal findings have been reproduced with pure natural human CRP. Nevertheless,
the strong proinflammatory effects of infusing recombinant bacterial CRP into
humans have still been inappropriately ascribed to CRP.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of infusion into healthy adult human
volunteers of pure natural human CRP.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Comprehensively characterized, pharmaceutical-grade,
endotoxin-free, purified CRP, prepared to GMP standard from pooled normal human
donor plasma was infused as an intravenous bolus in 7 healthy adult human
volunteers at ≤2 mg/kg to provide circulating CRP concentrations ≤44 mg/L. No
recipient showed any significant clinical, hematologic, coagulation, or
biochemical changes, or any increase in proinflammatory cytokines or acute phase 
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: The human CRP molecule itself is not proinflammatory in healthy
human adults.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302770 
PMID: 24337102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2010 Jul-Sep;53(3):494-7. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.68290.

Serum tumor necrosis factor alpha and C-reactive protein in pediatric patients
with sepsis and its correlation with microbiologic findings.

Kumar S(1), Rizvi M.

Author information: 
(1)Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, AMU, Aligarh, India.

OBJECTIVE: To study the association of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and
C--reactive protein (CRP) with microbiologically documented cases of sepsis
versus clinically documented cases of sepsis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy nine pediatric patients with sepsis were studied. 
Relevant specimens were processed for bacterial or fungal etiology. TNF-a was
detected by enzyme immunoassay and CRP was detected by latex agglutination.
Thirty healthy cases were included in the study to establish baseline TNF-alpha
levels.
RESULTS: Forty two (53.2%) patients had a microbiologically documented sepsis.
Among Gram negative bacilli Escherichia coli was the most common isolate followed
by Klebsiella spp. Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae
predominated among the Gram positive cocci. Patients with a positive culture had 
significantly higher TNF-alpha levels than patients with a negative culture (70
pg/ml vs. 33 pg/ml P < 0.01). Further, pure gram negative infection correlated
with significantly higher TNF-alpha levels than pure (P < 0.01) gram positive
infection. The CRP values did not highlight these differences significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: TNF-alpha level was significantly raised in patients with sepsis.
TNF-a levels were raised significantly in culture positive cases in general and
in Gram negative infections in particular. Serum TNF-alpha was a more sensitive
marker for different categories of sepsis compared to CRP and microbiology
culture.

DOI: 10.4103/0377-4929.68290 
PMID: 20699510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Circ Res. 2005 Nov 25;97(11):e97-103. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Proinflammatory effects of bacterial recombinant human C-reactive protein are
caused by contamination with bacterial products, not by C-reactive protein
itself.

Pepys MB(1), Hawkins PN, Kahan MC, Tennent GA, Gallimore JR, Graham D, Sabin CA, 
Zychlinsky A, de Diego J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Department of Medicine, Royal
Free and University College Medical School, London, UK. m.pepys@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2005 Dec 9;97(12):e115-6.

Intravenous administration to human volunteers of a commercial preparation of
recombinant human C-reactive protein (CRP) produced in Escherichia coli was
recently reported in this journal to induce an acute phase response of serum
amyloid A protein (SAA) and of CRP itself, and to activate the coagulation
system. The authors concluded that CRP is probably a mediator of atherothrombotic
disease. Here we confirm that this recombinant CRP preparation was
proinflammatory both for mouse macrophages in vitro and for mice in vivo, but
show that pure natural human CRP had no such activity. Furthermore mice
transgenic for human CRP, and expressing it throughout their lives, maintained
normal concentrations of their most sensitive endogenous acute phase reactants,
SAA and serum amyloid P component (SAP). The patterns of in vitro cytokine
induction and of in vivo acute phase stimulation by the recombinant CRP
preparation were consistent with contamination by bacterial products, and there
was 46.6 EU of apparent endotoxin activity per mg of CRP in the bacterial
product, compared with 0.9 EU per mg of our isolated natural human CRP
preparation. The absence of any proinflammatory activity in natural CRP for
macrophages or healthy mice strongly suggests that the in vivo effects of the
recombinant preparation observed in humans were attributable to proinflammatory
bacterial products and not human CRP.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000193595.03608.08 
PMCID: PMC1400607
PMID: 16254214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997 Oct;156(4 Pt 1):1157-64.

Dose-response relationship to inhaled endotoxin in normal subjects.

Michel O(1), Nagy AM, Schroeven M, Duchateau J, Nève J, Fondu P, Sergysels R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Allergology and Respiratory Diseases, Saint-Pierre University
Hospital (ULB), Brussels, Belgium. omichel@resulb.ulb.ac.be

Exposure to endotoxin and to its purified derivative lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is 
related to several occupational pulmonary diseases and to severe domestic asthma.
An inhalation of a given dose of pure LPS produces both a systemic and a
bronchial inflammatory response. Information on the dose-response relationship to
inhaled LPS in normal subjects is a prerequisite to define the safety threshold
of exposure. In the present study, the clinical and inflammatory responses to
rising doses of inhaled LPS was evaluated. Nine normal volunteers were challenged
weekly by inhalation with saline, 0.5, 5, and 50 microg LPS (Escherichia coli).
The response determinators are the clinical symptoms, fever, FEV1, blood
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) with their level of activation (measured by 
luminol enhanced-chemiluminescence), and both the blood and the urine
concentrations of the C-reactive protein (CRP). To assess the bronchial
inflammatory response, an induced sputum was obtained 6 h after each dose of LPS,
and the total and differential cell counts as well as the MPO, ECP, and TNF-alpha
concentrations were measured. Compared with the saline, an inhalation of 0.5
microg LPS induces a significant decrease in the PMN luminol-enhanced
chemiluminescence (p < 0.01), which could reflect a process of margination and/or
extravascular sequestration of activated PMN. Inhalation of 5 microg LPS is
associated with a significant rise in blood CRP (p < 0.01) and PMNs (p < 0.001)
and in sputum PMNs (p < 0.05), monocytes (p < 0.05), and MPO (p < 0.05).
Inhalation of 50 microg LPS was characterized by a significant increase in
temperature (p < 0.01), blood PMNs (p < 0.001), blood and urine CRP (p < 0.01 and
< 0.01), and sputum PMNs (p < 0.001), monocytes (p < 0.05), lymphocytes (p <
0.05), MPO (p < 0.01), TNF-alpha (p < 0.01), and ECP (p < 0.01) while five
subjects develop symptoms. In normal subjects, the response to inhaled LPS is
dose-related, the most sensitive markers of LPS-induced inflammation being the
blood PMNs count with their level of activation, the blood CRP concentration, and
the sputum PMNs count. The no-response threshold to an acute inhalation of LPS is
less than 0.5 microg.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.156.4.97-02002 
PMID: 9351616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Jun;143 ( Pt 6):2085-2095. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-6-2085.

The aldA gene of Escherichia coli is under the control of at least three
transcriptional regulators.

Limón A(1), Hidalgo E(1), Aguilar J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona,
Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Expression studies on the aldA gene encoding aldehyde dehydrogenase in
Escherichia coli showed induction by two types of molecule (hydroxyaldehydes and 
2-oxoglutarate), carbon catabolite repression and respiration dependence.
Promoter deletion analysis showed that the proximal operator, which includes
inducer-regulator complex and catabolite repression protein (Crp) recognition
sites, was necessary for induction by either type of inducer, and that full
induction by aldehydes required the cooperation of distal operator sequences
beyond position -119. Interactions of the regulator protein with the -59 to -6
fragment were shown by DNA mobility shift assays. Fusions of different deletions 
of the aldA promoter to lacZ indicated that a Crp site proximal to the
transcriptional start point (tsp) was functional in the cAMP-dependent catabolite
repression of this system, whereas a distal control site was likely to operate in
a cAMP-independent catabolite repression. DNA mobility shift and footprint
analyses showed that only the tsp proximal site was bound by pure Crp with a Kd
of 5.4 x 10(-7) M. As shown by an Arc-defective strain, the aldA gene seems to be
repressed by the Arc system under anaerobiosis, displaying its physiological full
induction and activity in the presence of oxygen.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-6-2085 
PMID: 9202484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biolumin Chemilumin. 1990 Apr-Jun;5(2):99-106.

Control of the lux regulon of Vibrio fischeri.

Shadel GS(1), Devine JH, Baldwin TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A & M University, College
Station 77843.

Regulation of expression of bioluminescence from the Vibrio fischeri lux regulon 
in Escherichia coli is a consequence of a unique form of positive feedback
superimposed on a poorly defined cis-acting repression mechanism. The lux regulon
consists of two divergently transcribed operons. The leftward operon contains
only a single gene, luxR, which encodes a transcriptional activator protein. The 
rightward operon contains luxI, which together with luxR and the 218 base pairs
separating the two operons comprises the primary regulatory circuit, and the five
structural genes, luxC, luxD, luxA, luxB and luxE, which are required for the
bioluminescence activity. Transcription of luxR from PL is stimulated by binding 
of the E. coli crp gene product to the sequence TGTGACAAAAATCCAA upstream of the 
presumed promoter. Binding of pure E. coli CAP protein in a cAMP-dependent
reaction to the V. fischeri lux regulatory region has been demonstrated by in
vitro footprinting. The luxI gene product is an enzyme which catalyses a
condensation reaction of cytoplasmic substrates to yield the autoinducer,
N-(3-oxo-hexanoyl) homoserine lactone. Accumulation of autoinducer, which is
freely diffusible, results in formation of a complex with LuxR. The complex binds
to the sequence ACCTGTAGGATCGTACAGGT upstream of PR to stimulate transcription of
the rightward operon. Increased transcription from PR should yield increased
levels of LuxI and higher levels of autoinducer which would further activate
LuxR. The LuxR binding site is also a LexA binding site, as demonstrated by in
vitro footprinting. Basal transcription from both PL and PR is repressed by
sequences within the luxR coding region.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/bio.1170050205 
PMID: 2186599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1982 Jul;151(1):153-61.

Isolation and characterization of purine regulatory mutants of Salmonella
typhimurium with an episomal purE-lac fusion.

Thomulka KW, Gots JS.

Expression of the purE operon of Salmonella typhimurium was analyzed by using an 
Escherichia coli F' episome containing a purE-lac fusion. The fusion removes the 
lacOP and part of the lacZ genes of the lac operon and places the intact lacY and
lacA genes under control of the purE operon as shown by inhibition of growth on
melibiose (lacY) and repression of thiogalactoside transacetylase (lacA) by
various purines. Two classes of regulatory-deficient mutants were found among
those resistant to inhibition by purines. One class was trans active
(chromosomal) and corresponded to previously described purR mutants involving a
deficient cytoplasmic repressor substance. These were also altered in the
expression of the purF, purD, purG amd purI genes as evidenced by loss of
repressibility of the synthesis of glycinamide ribotide and aminoimidazole
ribotide. The other class was cis active (episomal), specific for only purE
expression, and thus corresponded to an altered purE operon signal (operator or
promoter). The metabolic requirements for the expression of purE were also
monitored by measuring repression of the transacetylase in strains with various
genetically altered metabolic backgrounds. Repression by guanine required an
intact guanine phosphorbosyltransferase (gpt) and repression by adenine and all
nucleosides required purine nucleoside phosphorylase (deoD). Synthesis of cyclic 
AMP (cya) and its receptor protein (crp) were no longer required for the
expression of the lac genes under purE control.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.151.1.153-161.1982 
PMCID: PMC220220
PMID: 7045073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Gene. 1979 Sep;7(1):1-14.

Preparation and characterization of large amounts of restriction fragments
containing the E. coli lac control elements.

Hardies SC, Wells RD.

Large quantities of pure DNA fragments (789, 203 and 95 bp in length) containing 
the Escherichia coli lac controlling elements (operator, promoter, CRP binding
site) were prepared from appropriate recombinant plasmids. High pressure liquid
chromatography on RPC-5 or preparative sucrose gradient centrifugation was used
to fractionate the pVH51 vector from the inserts. The fragments had few, if any, 
nicks or depurinated sites, and the majority of the fragment ends were intact.
Absorbance-temperature profiles on the fragments showed multiphasic transitions.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(79)90039-8 
PMID: 387526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (cfa)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 15;11(1):6060. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-85161-1.

Characterization of the pathophysiological determinants of diarrheagenic
Escherichia coli infection using a challenge model in healthy adults.

van Hoffen E(1), Mercenier A(#)(2)(3), Vidal K(#)(2), Benyacoub J(2), Schloesser 
J(4), Kardinaal A(1), Lucas-van de Bos E(1), van Alen I(1), Roggero I(2),
Duintjer K(1)(5), Berendts A(1), Albers R(3), Kleerebezem M(5), Ten Bruggencate
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Health, NIZO, PO Box 20, 6710 BA, Ede, the
Netherlands.
(2)Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Gastrointestinal Health, Nestlé Research,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)NutriLeads, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Health, NIZO, PO Box 20, 6710 BA, Ede, the
Netherlands. Joyce.Schloesser@nizo.com.
(5)Host Microbe Interactomics Group, Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen
University and Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

An experimental human challenge model with an attenuated diarrheagenic
Escherichia coli (E. coli) strain has been used in food intervention studies
aimed to increase resistance to E. coli infection. This study was designed to
refine and expand this challenge model. In a double-blind study, healthy male
subjects were orally challenged with 1E10 or 5E10 colony-forming units (CFU) of
E. coli strain E1392/75-2A. Three weeks later, subjects were rechallenged with
1E10 CFU of E. coli. Before and after both challenges, clinical symptoms and
infection- and immune-related biomarkers were analyzed. Subset analysis was
performed on clinically high- and low-responders. Regardless of inoculation dose,
the first challenge induced clinical symptoms for 2-3 days. In blood,
neutrophils, CRP, CXCL10, and CFA/II-specific IgG were induced, and in feces
calprotectin and CFA/II-specific IgA. Despite clinical differences between high- 
and low-responders, infection and immune biomarkers did not differ. The first
inoculation induced protection at the second challenge, with a minor clinical
response, and no change in biomarkers. The refined study design resulted in a
larger dynamic range of symptoms, and identification of biomarkers induced by a
challenge with the attenuated E. coli strain E1392/75-2A, which is of value for
future intervention studies. Addition of a second inoculation allows to study the
protective response induced by a primary infection.Clinicaltrials.gov
registration: NCT02541695 (04/09/2015).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-85161-1 
PMCID: PMC7960709
PMID: 33723346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2005 Feb;187(3):980-90.

Functional interactions between the carbon and iron utilization regulators, Crp
and Fur, in Escherichia coli.

Zhang Z(1), Gosset G, Barabote R, Gonzalez CS, Cuevas WA, Saier MH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0116, USA.

In Escherichia coli, the ferric uptake regulator (Fur) controls expression of the
iron regulon in response to iron availability while the cyclic AMP receptor
protein (Crp) regulates expression of the carbon regulon in response to carbon
availability. We here identify genes subject to significant changes in expression
level in response to the loss of both Fur and Crp. Many iron transport genes and 
several carbon metabolic genes are subject to dual control, being repressed by
the loss of Crp and activated by the loss of Fur. However, the sodB gene,
encoding superoxide dismutase, and the aceBAK operon, encoding the glyoxalate
shunt enzymes, show the opposite responses, being activated by the loss of Crp
and repressed by the loss of Fur. Several other genes including the sdhA-D,
sucA-D, and fumA genes, encoding key constituents of the Krebs cycle, proved to
be repressed by the loss of both transcription factors. Finally, the loss of both
Crp and Fur activated a heterogeneous group of genes under sigmaS control
encoding, for example, the cyclopropane fatty acid synthase, Cfa, the glycogen
synthesis protein, GlgS, the 30S ribosomal protein, S22, and the mechanosensitive
channel protein, YggB. Many genes appeared to be regulated by the two
transcription factors in an apparently additive fashion, but apparent positive or
negative cooperativity characterized several putative Crp/Fur interactions.
Relevant published data were evaluated, putative Crp and Fur binding sites were
identified, and representative results were confirmed by real-time PCR. Molecular
explanations for some, but not all, of these effects are provided.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.3.980-990.2005 
PMCID: PMC545712
PMID: 15659676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (sdiA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Environ Int. 2018 Nov;120:421-430. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.07.046. Epub 2018
Aug 18.

Antidepressant fluoxetine induces multiple antibiotics resistance in Escherichia 
coli via ROS-mediated mutagenesis.

Jin M(1), Lu J(2), Chen Z(2), Nguyen SH(3), Mao L(2), Li J(4), Yuan Z(2), Guo
J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia; Department of Environment and Health, Tianjin
Institute of Environmental & Operational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Risk
Assessment and Control for Environment & Food Safety, Tianjin 300050, China.
(2)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
(4)Department of Environment and Health, Tianjin Institute of Environmental &
Operational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Risk Assessment and Control for
Environment & Food Safety, Tianjin 300050, China.
(5)Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. Electronic address: j.guo@awmc.uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Antibiotic resistance poses a great threat to global public health.
Overuse of antibiotics is generally considered as the major factor contributing
to it. However, little is known about whether non-antibiotic drugs could play
potential roles in the emergence of antibiotic resistance.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether antidepressant fluoxetine induces
multiple antibiotic resistances and reveal underlying mechanisms.
METHODOLOGY: Escherichia coli K12 was exposed to different concentrations of
fluoxetine (0, 0.5, 5, 50 and 100 mg/L) and the resistant strains were isolated
by plating on antibiotic containing plates. Resistant strains were randomly
selected to determine the increase of minimum inhibition concentration (MIC) of
multiple antibiotics. Genome-wide DNA sequencing was performed on cells cultured 
in lysogeny broth (LB) without any fluoxetine or antibiotics exposure. RNA
sequencing and proteomic profiling of isolated mutants grown in LB with 100 mg/L 
fluoxetine were analyzed to reveal the underlying mechanisms.
RESULTS: Exposure of Escherichia coli to fluoxetine at 5-100 mg/L after repeated 
subculture in LB for 30 days promoted its mutation frequency resulting in
increased resistance against the antibiotics chloramphenicol, amoxicillin and
tetracycline. This increase was up to 5.0 × 107 fold in a dose-time pattern.
Isolated mutants with resistance to one of these antibiotics also exhibited
multiple resistances against fluoroquinolone, aminoglycoside, β-lactams,
tetracycline and chloramphenicol. According to global transcriptional and
proteomic analyses, the AcrAB-TolC pump together with the YadG/YadH transporter, 
a Tsx channel and the MdtEF-TolC pump have been triggered to export the
antibiotics to the exterior of the cell. Whole-genome DNA analysis of the mutants
further revealed that ROS-mediated mutagenesis (e.g., deletion, insertion, and
substitution) of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators (e.g., marR, rob, sdiA,
cytR and crp) to up-regulate the expression of efflux pumps, may further enhance 
the antibiotic efflux.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings for the first time demonstrated that the exposure to
antidepressant fluoxetine induces multiple antibiotic resistance in E. coli via
the ROS-mediated mutagenesis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.07.046 
PMID: 30125859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 2013 Jul;195(14):3156-64. doi: 10.1128/JB.02254-12. Epub 2013 May
10.

The multifunctional protein YdiV represses P fimbria-mediated adherence in
uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Spurbeck RR(1), Alteri CJ, Himpsl SD, Mobley HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

YdiV, a degenerate EAL domain protein, represses motility by interacting with
FlhD to abolish FlhDC interaction with DNA. Here, we demonstrate that deletion of
ydiV dysregulates coordinate control of motility and adherence by increasing
adherence of Escherichia coli CFT073 to a bladder epithelial cell line by
specifically increasing production of P fimbriae. Interestingly, only one of the 
two P fimbrial operons, pap_2, present in the genome of E. coli CFT073 was
upregulated. This derepression of the pap_2 operon is abolished following
deletion of either cya or crp, demonstrating cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent
activation of the P fimbrial operon. However, the absence of YdiV does not affect
the gene expression of cya and crp, and loss of SdiA in the ydiV mutant does not 
affect the derepression of the pap_2 operon, suggesting that YdiV control of
adherence acts in response to cAMP levels. Deletion of ydiV increases motility by
increasing expression of fliA, suggesting that in E. coli CFT073, YdiV regulates 
motility by the same mechanism as that described previously for commensal E. coli
strains. Furthermore, analysis of site-directed mutations found two putative
Mg(2+)-binding residues of four conserved YdiV residues (E29 and Q219) that were 
involved in regulation of motility and FliC production, while two conserved
c-di-GMP-binding residues (D156 and D165) only affected motility. None of the
four conserved YdiV residues appeared to affect regulation of adherence.
Therefore, we propose a model in which a degenerate EAL, YdiV, utilizes different
domains to regulate motility through interaction with FlhD and adherence to
epithelial cells through cAMP-dependent effects on the pap_2 promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02254-12 
PMCID: PMC3697638
PMID: 23667238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jan;78(2):411-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

Indole production promotes Escherichia coli mixed-culture growth with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by inhibiting quorum signaling.

Chu W(1), Zere TR, Weber MM, Wood TK, Whiteley M, Hidalgo-Romano B, Valenzuela E 
Jr, McLean RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Science and Technology, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

Indole production by Escherichia coli, discovered in the early 20th century, has 
been used as a diagnostic marker for distinguishing E. coli from other enteric
bacteria. By using transcriptional profiling and competition studies with defined
mutants, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP)-regulated indole formation is a major
factor that enables E. coli growth in mixed biofilm and planktonic populations
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mutants deficient in cAMP production (cyaA) or the
cAMP receptor gene (crp), as well as indole production (tnaA), were not
competitive in coculture with P. aeruginosa but could be restored to wild-type
competitiveness by supplementation with a physiologically relevant indole
concentration. E. coli sdiA mutants, which lacked the receptor for both indole
and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs), showed no change in competitive fitness,
suggesting that indole acted directly on P. aeruginosa. An E. coli tnaA mutant
strain regained wild-type competiveness if grown with P. aeruginosa AHL synthase 
(rhlI and rhlI lasI) mutants. In contrast to the wild type, P. aeruginosa AHL
synthase mutants were unable to degrade indole. Indole produced during
mixed-culture growth inhibited pyocyanin production and other AHL-regulated
virulence factors in P. aeruginosa. Mixed-culture growth with P. aeruginosa
stimulated indole formation in E. coli cpdA, which is unable to regulate cAMP
levels, suggesting the potential for mixed-culture gene activation via cAMP.
These findings illustrate how indole, an early described feature of E. coli
central metabolism, can play a significant role in mixed-culture survival by
inhibiting quorum-regulated competition factors in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11 
PMCID: PMC3255741
PMID: 22101045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):937-48. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.67.

An EAL domain protein and cyclic AMP contribute to the interaction between the
two quorum sensing systems in Escherichia coli.

Zhou X(1), Meng X, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China.

Quorum sensing (QS) is a bacterial cell-cell communication process by which
bacteria communicate using extracellular signals called autoinducers. Two QS
systems have been identified in Escherichia coli K-12, including an intact QS
system 2 that is stimulated by the cyclic AMP (cAMP)-cAMP receptor protein (CRP) 
complex and a partial QS system 1 that consists of SdiA (suppressor of cell
division inhibitor) responding to signals generated by other microbial species.
The relationship between QS system 1 and system 2 in E. coli, however, remains
obscure. Here, we show that an EAL domain protein, encoded by ydiV, and cAMP are 
involved in the interaction between the two QS systems in E. coli. Expression of 
sdiA and ydiV is inhibited by glucose. SdiA binds to the ydiV promoter region in 
a dose-dependent, but nonspecific, manner; extracellular autoinducer 1 from other
species stimulates ydiV expression in an sdiA-dependent manner. Furthermore, we
discovered that the double sdiA-ydiV mutation, but not the single mutation,
causes a 2-fold decrease in intracellular cAMP concentration that leads to the
inhibition of QS system 2. These results indicate that signaling pathways that
respond to important environmental cues, such as autoinducers and glucose, are
linked together for their control in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.67 
PMID: 18560382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (ackA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 27;16(10):e0259067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259067.
eCollection 2021.

The secondary messenger ppGpp interferes with cAMP-CRP regulon by promoting CRP
acetylation in Escherichia coli.

Ro C(1), Cashel M(1), Fernández-Coll L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Development,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

The cAMP-CRP regulon coordinates transcription regulation of several
energy-related genes, the lac operon among them. Lactose, or IPTG, induces the
lac operon expression by binding to the LacI repressor, and releasing it from the
promoter sequence. At the same time, the expression of the lac operon requires
the presence of the CRP-cAMP complex, which promotes the binding of the RNA
polymerase to the promoter region. The modified nucleotide cAMP accumulates in
the absence of glucose and binds to the CRP protein, but its ability to bind to
DNA can be impaired by lysine-acetylation of CRP. Here we add another layer of
control, as acetylation of CRP seems to be modified by ppGpp. In cells grown in
glycerol minimal media, ppGpp seems to repress the expression of lacZ, where
ΔrelA mutants show higher expression of lacZ than in WT. These differences
between the WT and ΔrelA strains seem to depend on the levels of acetylated CRP. 
During the growth in minimal media supplemented with glycerol, ppGpp promotes the
acetylation of CRP by the Nε-lysine acetyltransferases YfiQ. Moreover, the
expression of the different genes involved in the production and degradation of
Acetyl-phosphate (ackA-pta) and the enzymatic acetylation of proteins (yfiQ) are 
stimulated by the presence of ppGpp, depending on the growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259067 
PMCID: PMC8550359
PMID: 34705884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


2. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Nov;104(22):9707-9718. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y. Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism to produce recombinant protein
in Escherichia coli.

Pandi K(1), Chauhan AS(1), Khan WH(1), Rathore AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India. asrathore@biotechcmz.com.

Phosphate is one of the major constituents in growth media. It closely regulates 
central carbon and energy metabolism. Biochemical reactions in central carbon
metabolism are known to be regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
enzymes. Phosphate scarcity can limit microbial productivity. However,
microorganisms are evolved to grow in phosphate starvation environments. This
study investigates the effect of phosphate-starved response (PSR) stimuli in
wild-type and recombinant Escherichia coli cells cultivated in two different
substrates, lactose, and glycerol. Phosphate-starved E. coli culture sustained
bacterial growth despite the metabolic burden that emanated from recombinant
protein expression albeit with altered dynamics of substrate utilisation.
Induction of lactose in phosphate-starved culture led to a 2-fold improvement in 
product titre of rSymlin and a 2.3-fold improvement in product titre of rLTNF as 
compared with phosphate-unlimited culture. The results obtained in the study are 
in agreement with the literature to infer that phosphate starvation or limitation
can slow down the microbial growth rate in order to produce recombinant proteins.
Further, under PSR conditions, gene expression analysis demonstrated that while
selected genes (gapdh, pykF, ppsA, icdA) in glycolysis and pentose phosphate
pathway (zwf, gnd, talB, tktA) were up-regulated, other genes in lactose (lacY,
lacA) and acetate (ackA, pta) pathway were down-regulated. We have demonstrated
that cra, crp, phoB, and phoR are involved in the regulation of central carbon
metabolism. We propose a novel cross-regulation between lactose metabolism and
phosphate starvation. UDP-galactose, a toxic metabolite that is known to cause
cell lysis, has been shown to be significantly reduced due to slow uptake of
lactose under PSR conditions. Therefore, E. coli employs a decoupling strategy by
limiting growth and redirecting metabolic resources to survive and produce
recombinant protein under phosphate starvation conditions. KEY POINTS: •
Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism, which results in less galactose
accumulation. • Phosphate starvation modulates metabolic flow of central carbon
metabolism. • Product titre improves by 2-fold due to phosphate starvation. • The
approach has been successfully applied to production of two different proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y 
PMID: 33001250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Mar 23;13(1):45. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45.

The metabolic potential of Escherichia coli BL21 in defined and rich medium.

Li Z, Nimtz M, Rinas U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124
Braunschweig, Germany. Ursula.Rinas@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: The proteome reflects the available cellular machinery to deal with
nutrients and environmental challenges. The most common E. coli strain BL21
growing in different, commonly employed media was evaluated using a detailed
quantitative proteome analysis.
RESULTS: The presence of preformed biomass precursor molecules in rich media such
as Luria Bertani supported rapid growth concomitant to acetate formation and
apparently unbalanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, e.g. high 
levels of lower glycolytic pathway enzymes as well as pyruvate dehydrogenase, and
low levels of TCA cycle and high levels of the acetate forming enzymes Pta and
AckA. The proteome of cells growing exponentially in glucose-supplemented mineral
salt medium was dominated by enzymes of amino acid synthesis pathways, contained 
more balanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, and a lower
portion of ribosomal and other translational proteins. Entry into stationary
phase led to a reconstruction of the bacterial proteome by increasing e.g. the
portion of proteins required for scavenging rare nutrients and general cell
protection. This proteomic reconstruction during entry into stationary phase was 
more noticeable in cells growing in rich medium as they have a greater reservoir 
of recyclable proteins from the translational machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: The proteomic comparison of cells growing exponentially in different
media reflected the antagonistic and competitive regulation of central metabolic 
pathways through the global transcriptional regulators Cra, Crp, and ArcA. For
example, the proteome of cells growing exponentially in rich medium was
consistent with a dominating role of phosphorylated ArcA most likely a result
from limitations in reoxidizing reduced quinones in the respiratory chain under
these growth conditions. The proteomic alterations of exponentially growing cells
into stationary phase cells were consistent with stringent-like and stationary
phase responses and a dominating control through DksA-ppGpp and RpoS.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45 
PMCID: PMC4021462
PMID: 24656150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiology (Reading). 2003 Mar;149(Pt 3):715-728. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0.

Autoinducer 2 activity in Escherichia coli culture supernatants can be actively
reduced despite maintenance of an active synthase, LuxS.

Hardie KR(1)(2), Cooksley C(2), Green AD(1)(2), Winzer K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nottingham University, Nottingham NG7 2RD, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Infections and Immunity, Queen's Medical Centre, C-Floor, West
Block, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Production of the signalling molecule (autoinducer-2) synthesized by LuxS has
been proposed to be pivotal to a universal mechanism of inter-species bacterial
cell-cell communication (quorum sensing); however recently the function of LuxS
has been noted to be integral to central metabolism since it contributes to the
activated methyl cycle. This paper shows that when Helicobacter pylori LuxS is
overproduced in Escherichia coli, it forms cross-linkable multimers. These
multimers persist at comparable levels after 24 h of growth if glucose is omitted
from the growth medium; however, the levels of extracellular autoinducer-2
decline (Glucose Retention of AI-2 Levels: GRAIL). Glycerol, maltose, galactose, 
ribose and L-arabinose could substitute for glucose, but lactose, D-arabinose,
acetate, citrate and pyruvate could not. Mutations in (i). metabolic pathways
(glycolytic enzymes eno, pgk, pgm; galactose epimerase; the Pta-AckA pathway),
(ii). sugar transport (pts components, rbs operon, mgl, trg), and (iii).
regulators involved in conventional catabolic repression (crp, cya),
cAMP-independent catabolite repression (creC, fruR, rpoS,) the stringent response
(relA, spoT) and the global carbon storage regulator (csrA) did not prevent
GRAIL. Although the basis of GRAIL remains uncertain, it is clear that the
mechanism is distinct from conventional catabolite repression. Moreover, GRAIL is
not due to inactivation of the enzymic activity of LuxS, since in E. coli, LuxS
contained within stationary-phase cells grown in the absence of glucose maintains
its activity in vitro.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0 
PMID: 12634340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (pta)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Dis Markers. 2022 Apr 26;2022:7512736. doi: 10.1155/2022/7512736. eCollection
2022.

Clinical Characteristics of Diabetes Complicated by Bacterial Liver Abscess and
Nondiabetes-Associated Liver Abscess.

Wang F(1), Yu J(1), Chen W(1), Mo Z(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hainan General Hospital, Hainan Affiliated
Hospital of Hainan Medical University, Haikou, Hainan 570311, China.

Background: Bacterial liver abscess (BLA) is a secondary infectious disease
caused by hepatic parenchymal inflammation and bacterial necrosis. Studies have
shown that diabetic patients with BLA have higher rates of related adverse events
than patients without diabetes.
Aim: To explore the clinical characteristics of BLA complicated with diabetes and
nondiabetes-related BLA.
Methods: From January 2019 to June 2020, 61 diabetic patients with BLA were
included as the study group, and 61 BLA patients without diabetes were included
as the control group. Clinical manifestations, laboratory examination index
(prothrombin activity (PTA), albumin (propagated), white blood cell count (WBC), 
red blood cell count (RBC), plasma fibrinogen (FIB), C-reactive protein (CRP),
neutrophil percentage (NEUT), and prealbumin (PA)) levels, blood cultivation, and
fester situation in the two groups were analyzed.
Results: No differences of Fever, right upper abdominal pain, jaundice, vomiting 
and nausea, liver tenderness, and liver pain upon percussion were observed
between the study and control groups. However, chill, cough and expectoration,
and liver pain upon percussion were higher in the study group, while abdominal
distension was lower. WBC, RBC, PA, PTA, FIB, and CRP were higher than the
control group. NEUT was higher in the study group than in the control group and
Alb was lower than that in the control group. There was no significant difference
between the positivity of blood bacterial culture in the study and control
groups. The positivity rate of Klebsiella pneumoniae in Gram-negative aerobic
bacteria in the study group was higher than that in the control group. There was 
no significant difference between the positivity of fester culture of the two
groups. The positivity of K. pneumoniae in Gram-negative aerobic bacteria in the 
study group was higher than that in the control group. The positivity of E. coli 
was lower in the study group than in the control group.
Conclusion: Clinical manifestations and laboratory results of BLA patients with
and without diabetes mellitus were significantly different. The symptoms of
diabetics with BLA were serious.

Copyright © 2022 Fei Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7512736 
PMCID: PMC9064492
PMID: 35521637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest


2. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 27;16(10):e0259067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259067.
eCollection 2021.

The secondary messenger ppGpp interferes with cAMP-CRP regulon by promoting CRP
acetylation in Escherichia coli.

Ro C(1), Cashel M(1), Fernández-Coll L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Development,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

The cAMP-CRP regulon coordinates transcription regulation of several
energy-related genes, the lac operon among them. Lactose, or IPTG, induces the
lac operon expression by binding to the LacI repressor, and releasing it from the
promoter sequence. At the same time, the expression of the lac operon requires
the presence of the CRP-cAMP complex, which promotes the binding of the RNA
polymerase to the promoter region. The modified nucleotide cAMP accumulates in
the absence of glucose and binds to the CRP protein, but its ability to bind to
DNA can be impaired by lysine-acetylation of CRP. Here we add another layer of
control, as acetylation of CRP seems to be modified by ppGpp. In cells grown in
glycerol minimal media, ppGpp seems to repress the expression of lacZ, where
ΔrelA mutants show higher expression of lacZ than in WT. These differences
between the WT and ΔrelA strains seem to depend on the levels of acetylated CRP. 
During the growth in minimal media supplemented with glycerol, ppGpp promotes the
acetylation of CRP by the Nε-lysine acetyltransferases YfiQ. Moreover, the
expression of the different genes involved in the production and degradation of
Acetyl-phosphate (ackA-pta) and the enzymatic acetylation of proteins (yfiQ) are 
stimulated by the presence of ppGpp, depending on the growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259067 
PMCID: PMC8550359
PMID: 34705884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


3. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Nov;104(22):9707-9718. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y. Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism to produce recombinant protein
in Escherichia coli.

Pandi K(1), Chauhan AS(1), Khan WH(1), Rathore AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi, 110016, India. asrathore@biotechcmz.com.

Phosphate is one of the major constituents in growth media. It closely regulates 
central carbon and energy metabolism. Biochemical reactions in central carbon
metabolism are known to be regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
enzymes. Phosphate scarcity can limit microbial productivity. However,
microorganisms are evolved to grow in phosphate starvation environments. This
study investigates the effect of phosphate-starved response (PSR) stimuli in
wild-type and recombinant Escherichia coli cells cultivated in two different
substrates, lactose, and glycerol. Phosphate-starved E. coli culture sustained
bacterial growth despite the metabolic burden that emanated from recombinant
protein expression albeit with altered dynamics of substrate utilisation.
Induction of lactose in phosphate-starved culture led to a 2-fold improvement in 
product titre of rSymlin and a 2.3-fold improvement in product titre of rLTNF as 
compared with phosphate-unlimited culture. The results obtained in the study are 
in agreement with the literature to infer that phosphate starvation or limitation
can slow down the microbial growth rate in order to produce recombinant proteins.
Further, under PSR conditions, gene expression analysis demonstrated that while
selected genes (gapdh, pykF, ppsA, icdA) in glycolysis and pentose phosphate
pathway (zwf, gnd, talB, tktA) were up-regulated, other genes in lactose (lacY,
lacA) and acetate (ackA, pta) pathway were down-regulated. We have demonstrated
that cra, crp, phoB, and phoR are involved in the regulation of central carbon
metabolism. We propose a novel cross-regulation between lactose metabolism and
phosphate starvation. UDP-galactose, a toxic metabolite that is known to cause
cell lysis, has been shown to be significantly reduced due to slow uptake of
lactose under PSR conditions. Therefore, E. coli employs a decoupling strategy by
limiting growth and redirecting metabolic resources to survive and produce
recombinant protein under phosphate starvation conditions. KEY POINTS: •
Phosphate starvation controls lactose metabolism, which results in less galactose
accumulation. • Phosphate starvation modulates metabolic flow of central carbon
metabolism. • Product titre improves by 2-fold due to phosphate starvation. • The
approach has been successfully applied to production of two different proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10935-y 
PMID: 33001250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Mar 23;13(1):45. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45.

The metabolic potential of Escherichia coli BL21 in defined and rich medium.

Li Z, Nimtz M, Rinas U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124
Braunschweig, Germany. Ursula.Rinas@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: The proteome reflects the available cellular machinery to deal with
nutrients and environmental challenges. The most common E. coli strain BL21
growing in different, commonly employed media was evaluated using a detailed
quantitative proteome analysis.
RESULTS: The presence of preformed biomass precursor molecules in rich media such
as Luria Bertani supported rapid growth concomitant to acetate formation and
apparently unbalanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, e.g. high 
levels of lower glycolytic pathway enzymes as well as pyruvate dehydrogenase, and
low levels of TCA cycle and high levels of the acetate forming enzymes Pta and
AckA. The proteome of cells growing exponentially in glucose-supplemented mineral
salt medium was dominated by enzymes of amino acid synthesis pathways, contained 
more balanced abundances of central metabolic pathway enzymes, and a lower
portion of ribosomal and other translational proteins. Entry into stationary
phase led to a reconstruction of the bacterial proteome by increasing e.g. the
portion of proteins required for scavenging rare nutrients and general cell
protection. This proteomic reconstruction during entry into stationary phase was 
more noticeable in cells growing in rich medium as they have a greater reservoir 
of recyclable proteins from the translational machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: The proteomic comparison of cells growing exponentially in different
media reflected the antagonistic and competitive regulation of central metabolic 
pathways through the global transcriptional regulators Cra, Crp, and ArcA. For
example, the proteome of cells growing exponentially in rich medium was
consistent with a dominating role of phosphorylated ArcA most likely a result
from limitations in reoxidizing reduced quinones in the respiratory chain under
these growth conditions. The proteomic alterations of exponentially growing cells
into stationary phase cells were consistent with stringent-like and stationary
phase responses and a dominating control through DksA-ppGpp and RpoS.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-45 
PMCID: PMC4021462
PMID: 24656150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biotechnol. 2013 Oct 20;168(2):155-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.06.023. Epub
2013 Jul 10.

Catabolite regulation analysis of Escherichia coli for acetate overflow mechanism
and co-consumption of multiple sugars based on systems biology approach using
computer simulation.

Matsuoka Y(1), Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Iizuka, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan.

It is quite important to understand the basic principle embedded in the main
metabolism for the interpretation of the fermentation data. For this, it may be
useful to understand the regulation mechanism based on systems biology approach. 
In the present study, we considered the perturbation analysis together with
computer simulation based on the models which include the effects of global
regulators on the pathway activation for the main metabolism of Escherichia coli.
Main focus is the acetate overflow metabolism and the co-fermentation of multiple
carbon sources. The perturbation analysis was first made to understand the nature
of the feed-forward loop formed by the activation of Pyk by FDP (F1,6BP), and the
feed-back loop formed by the inhibition of Pfk by PEP in the glycolysis. Those
together with the effect of transcription factor Cra caused by FDP level affected
the glycolysis activity. The PTS (phosphotransferase system) acts as the
feed-back system by repressing the glucose uptake rate for the increase in the
glucose uptake rate. It was also shown that the increased PTS flux (or glucose
consumption rate) causes PEP/PYR ratio to be decreased, and EIIA-P, Cya, cAMP-Crp
decreased, where cAMP-Crp in turn repressed TCA cycle and more acetate is formed.
This was further verified by the detailed computer simulation. In the case of
multiple carbon sources such as glucose and xylose, it was shown that the
sequential utilization of carbon sources was observed for wild type, while the
co-consumption of multiple carbon sources with slow consumption rates were
observed for the ptsG mutant by computer simulation, and this was verified by
experiments. Moreover, the effect of a specific gene knockout such as Δpyk on the
metabolic characteristics was also investigated based on the computer simulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.06.023 
PMID: 23850830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Microbiology (Reading). 2003 Mar;149(Pt 3):715-728. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0.

Autoinducer 2 activity in Escherichia coli culture supernatants can be actively
reduced despite maintenance of an active synthase, LuxS.

Hardie KR(1)(2), Cooksley C(2), Green AD(1)(2), Winzer K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nottingham University, Nottingham NG7 2RD, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Infections and Immunity, Queen's Medical Centre, C-Floor, West
Block, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Production of the signalling molecule (autoinducer-2) synthesized by LuxS has
been proposed to be pivotal to a universal mechanism of inter-species bacterial
cell-cell communication (quorum sensing); however recently the function of LuxS
has been noted to be integral to central metabolism since it contributes to the
activated methyl cycle. This paper shows that when Helicobacter pylori LuxS is
overproduced in Escherichia coli, it forms cross-linkable multimers. These
multimers persist at comparable levels after 24 h of growth if glucose is omitted
from the growth medium; however, the levels of extracellular autoinducer-2
decline (Glucose Retention of AI-2 Levels: GRAIL). Glycerol, maltose, galactose, 
ribose and L-arabinose could substitute for glucose, but lactose, D-arabinose,
acetate, citrate and pyruvate could not. Mutations in (i). metabolic pathways
(glycolytic enzymes eno, pgk, pgm; galactose epimerase; the Pta-AckA pathway),
(ii). sugar transport (pts components, rbs operon, mgl, trg), and (iii).
regulators involved in conventional catabolic repression (crp, cya),
cAMP-independent catabolite repression (creC, fruR, rpoS,) the stringent response
(relA, spoT) and the global carbon storage regulator (csrA) did not prevent
GRAIL. Although the basis of GRAIL remains uncertain, it is clear that the
mechanism is distinct from conventional catabolite repression. Moreover, GRAIL is
not due to inactivation of the enzymic activity of LuxS, since in E. coli, LuxS
contained within stationary-phase cells grown in the absence of glucose maintains
its activity in vitro.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.25853-0 
PMID: 12634340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (csiD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Feb;51(3):799-811.

Multiple stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex sigma
S-dependent csiD-ygaF-gabDTP operon in Escherichia coli.

Metzner M(1), Germer J, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The csiD-ygaF-gabDTP region in the Escherichia coli genome represents a cluster
of sigma S-controlled genes. Here, we investigated promoter structures, sigma
factor dependencies, potential co-regulation and environmental regulatory
patterns for all of these genes. We find that this region constitutes a complex
operon with expression being controlled by three differentially regulated
promoters: (i) csiDp, which affects the expression of all five genes, is
cAMP-CRP/sigma S-dependent and activated exclusively upon carbon starvation and
stationary phase; (ii) gabDp1, which is sigma S-dependent and exhibits multiple
stress induction like sigma S itself; and (iii) gabDp2[previously suggested by
Schneider, B.L., Ruback, S., Kiupakis, A.K., Kasbarian, H., Pybus, C., and
Reitzer, L. (2002) J. Bacteriol. 184: 6976-6986], which appears to be Nac/sigma
70-controlled and to respond to poor nitrogen sources. In addition, we identify a
novel repressor, CsiR, which modulates csiDp activity in a temporal manner during
early stationary phase. Finally, we propose a physiological role for sigma
S-controlled GabT/D-mediated gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) catabolism and glutamate 
accumulation in general stress adaptation. This physiological role is reflected
by the activation of the operon-internal gabDp1 promoter under the different
conditions that also induce sigma S, which include shifts to acidic pH or high
osmolarity as well as starvation or stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03867.x 
PMID: 14731280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Aug;41(3):705-16.

Role of activator site position and a distal UP-element half-site for sigma
factor selectivity at a CRP/H-NS-activated sigma(s)-dependent promoter in
Escherichia coli.

Germer J(1), Becker G, Metzner M, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie - Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin,
Königin-Luise-Str. 12-16, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription initiation by the stress-associated sigma(S)-containing RNA
polymerase holoenzyme (E sigma(S)) in Escherichia coli is often subject to
complex regulation that involves multiple additional regulators and histone-like 
proteins. csiD is a stationary phase-inducible sigma(S)-dependent gene in E. coli
that requires activation by cAMP-CRP (bound to a site centred at -68.5
nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional start site) and is positively
modulated by the abundant nucleoid-associated proteins H-NS and Lrp. By shifting 
the CRP box to positions between -80.5 and -60.5, we could demonstrate that: (i) 
activation is equally helix phase dependent as at classic class I promoters; (ii)
E sigma(S) prefers a CRP box location at -68.5/-70.5, whereas E sigma(70) is
nearly inactive with such an arrangement; and (iii) with the CRP site moved to
-60.5, transcription can be initiated efficiently by both holoenzymes. The csiD
promoter region also contains a distal UP-element half-site located downstream of
the CRP box, as demonstrated by mutational studies, in which this element was
either eliminated or completed to a full UP-element. The UP-element half-site
favours E sigma(S)-mediated expression, whereas with the full UP-element, nearly 
wild-type levels of csiD transcription were observed in the absence of sigma(S). 
Finally, we show that the two histone-like proteins, H-NS and Lrp, both act by
influencing activation by cAMP-CRP, but do so by different mechanisms. In
particular, H-NS directly or indirectly increases positional stringency for the
CRP binding site. The implications of these findings with respect to sigma factor
selectivity, activation mechanisms used by the two holoenzymes and the
architecture of sigma(S)-dependent promoters are discussed.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02548.x 
PMID: 11532138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Biol. 1998 Feb 20;276(2):339-53.

Molecular analysis of the regulation of csiD, a carbon starvation-inducible gene 
in Escherichia coli that is exclusively dependent on sigma s and requires
activation by cAMP-CRP.

Marschall C(1), Labrousse V, Kreimer M, Weichart D, Kolb A, Hengge-Aronis R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany.

The general stress-induced sigma subunit sigma s of Escherichia coli RNA
polymerase is closely related to the vegetative sigma factor sigma 70. In view of
their very similar promoter specificity in vitro, it is unclear how sigma factor 
selectivity in the expression of sigma s-dependent genes is generated in vivo.
The csiD gene is such a strongly sigma s-dependent gene. In contrast to sigma s, 
which is induced in response to many different stresses, csiD, whose expression
is driven from a single promoter, is induced by carbon starvation only. To our
knowledge, the csiD promoter is the first characterized promoter which is not
only exclusively dependent on sigma s-containing RNA polymerase (E sigma s), but 
also requires an activator, cAMP-CRP. In addition, leucine-responsive regulatory 
protein (Lrp) acts as a positive modulator of csiD expression. Also in vitro, E
sigma s is more efficient than E sigma 70 in csiD promoter binding, open complex 
formation and run-off transcription, which might be due to the poor match of the 
csiD -35 region to the sigma 70 consensus and to transcription by E sigma s being
less dependent on contacts in this region. By DNase I protection experiments, a
cAMP-CRP binding site centered at -68.5 nucleotides upstream of the csiD
transcriptional start site was identified. While cAMP-CRP stimulates E sigma 70
binding, it does not promote open complex formation by E sigma 70, but does so in
conjunction with E sigma s. With linear templates, cAMP-CRP significantly
stimulates E sigma s-mediated in vitro transcription, whereas transcription by E 
sigma 70 is negligible and hardly stimulated by cAMP-CRP. These findings may
reflect different or less stringent positional requirements for an activator site
for E sigma s than for E sigma 70, and indicate that cAMP-CRP contributes to
sigma factor selectivity at the csiD promoter. In vitro transcription experiments
with super-coiled templates, however, revealed significant cAMP-CRP-stimulated
transcription also by E sigma 70. Yet, under these conditions, H-NS was found to 
restore E sigma s specificity by strongly interfering with cAMP-CRP/E sigma
70-dependent transcription. Lrp strongly and cooperatively binds to multiple
sites located between positions -14 and -102 (in a way that suggests DNA wrapping
around multiple Lrp molecules) and moderately stimulates in vitro transcription, 
especially with E sigma s. In summary, we conclude that the csiD promoter has an 
intrinsic preference for E sigma s, but that also protein factors such as
cAMP-CRP, Lrp and probably H-NS as well as DNA conformation contribute to its
strong E sigma s selectivity. Furthermore, this strong E sigma s preference in
combination with a requirement for high concentrations of the essential activator
cAMP-CRP ensures csiD expression under conditions of carbon starvation, but not
other stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1533 
PMID: 9512707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (csiR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Feb;51(3):799-811.

Multiple stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex sigma
S-dependent csiD-ygaF-gabDTP operon in Escherichia coli.

Metzner M(1), Germer J, Hengge R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Mikrobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The csiD-ygaF-gabDTP region in the Escherichia coli genome represents a cluster
of sigma S-controlled genes. Here, we investigated promoter structures, sigma
factor dependencies, potential co-regulation and environmental regulatory
patterns for all of these genes. We find that this region constitutes a complex
operon with expression being controlled by three differentially regulated
promoters: (i) csiDp, which affects the expression of all five genes, is
cAMP-CRP/sigma S-dependent and activated exclusively upon carbon starvation and
stationary phase; (ii) gabDp1, which is sigma S-dependent and exhibits multiple
stress induction like sigma S itself; and (iii) gabDp2[previously suggested by
Schneider, B.L., Ruback, S., Kiupakis, A.K., Kasbarian, H., Pybus, C., and
Reitzer, L. (2002) J. Bacteriol. 184: 6976-6986], which appears to be Nac/sigma
70-controlled and to respond to poor nitrogen sources. In addition, we identify a
novel repressor, CsiR, which modulates csiDp activity in a temporal manner during
early stationary phase. Finally, we propose a physiological role for sigma
S-controlled GabT/D-mediated gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) catabolism and glutamate 
accumulation in general stress adaptation. This physiological role is reflected
by the activation of the operon-internal gabDp1 promoter under the different
conditions that also induce sigma S, which include shifts to acidic pH or high
osmolarity as well as starvation or stationary phase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03867.x 
PMID: 14731280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (cpdA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiology (Reading). 2018 Mar;164(3):410-419. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000618. Epub 
2018 Feb 8.

cAMP-CRP acts as a key regulator for the viable but non-culturable state in
Escherichia coli.

Nosho K(1), Fukushima H(1), Asai T(1), Nishio M(1), Takamaru R(1),
Kobayashi-Kirschvink KJ(2), Ogawa T(1), Hidaka M(1), Masaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Basic Science, The University of Tokyo, Komaba, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

A variety of bacteria, including Escherichia coli, are known to enter the viable 
but non-culturable (VBNC) state under various stress conditions. During this
state, cells lose colony-forming activities on conventional agar plates while
retaining signs of viability. Diverse environmental stresses including starvation
induce the VBNC state. However, little is known about the genetic mechanism
inducing this state. Here, we aimed to reveal the genetic determinants of the
VBNC state of E. coli. We hypothesized that the VBNC state is a process wherein
specific gene products important for colony formation are depleted during the
extended period of stress conditions. If so, higher expression of these genes
would maintain colony-forming activities, thereby restraining cells from entering
the VBNC state. From an E. coli plasmid-encoded ORF library, we identified genes 
that were responsible for maintaining high colony-forming activities after
exposure to starvation condition. Among these, cpdA encoding cAMP
phosphodiesterase exhibited higher performance in the maintenance of
colony-forming activities. As cpdA overexpression decreases intracellular cAMP,
cAMP or its complex with cAMP-receptor protein (CRP) may negatively regulate
colony-forming activities under stress conditions. We confirmed this using
deletion mutants lacking adenylate cyclase or CRP. These mutants fully maintained
colony-forming activities even after a long period of starvation, while wild-type
cells lost most of this activity. Thus, we concluded that the lack of cAMP-CRP
effectively retains high colony-forming activities, indicating that cAMP-CRP acts
as a positive regulator necessary for the induction of the VBNC state in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000618 
PMID: 29458560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 14;6:24449. doi: 10.1038/srep24449.

Reduced expression of cytochrome oxidases largely explains cAMP inhibition of
aerobic growth in Shewanella oneidensis.

Yin J(1), Meng Q(1), Fu H(1), Gao H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Agro-Microbial Research and Utilization, Zhejiang Province 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.

Inhibition of bacterial growth under aerobic conditions by elevated levels of
cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP), first revealed more than 50 years
ago, was attributed to accumulation of toxic methylglyoxal (MG). Here, we report 
a Crp-dependent mechanism rather than MG accumulation that accounts for the
phenotype in Shewanella oneidensis, an emerging research model for the bacterial 
physiology. We show that a similar phenotype can be obtained by removing CpdA, a 
cAMP phosphodiesterase that appears more effective than its Escherichia coli
counterpart. Although production of heme c and cytochromes c is correlated well
with cAMP levels, neither is sufficient for the retarded growth. Quantities of
overall cytochromes c increased substantially in the presence of elevated cAMP, a
phenomenon resembling cells respiring on non-oxygen electron acceptors. In
contrast, transcription of Crp-dependent genes encoding both cytochromes bd and
cbb3 oxidases is substantially repressed under the same condition. Overall, our
results suggest that cAMP of elevated levels drives cells into a low-energetic
status, under which aerobic respiration is inhibited.

DOI: 10.1038/srep24449 
PMCID: PMC4830989
PMID: 27076065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Microbiology (Reading). 2014 Sep;160(Pt 9):2079-2088. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.080705-0. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

A cAMP-independent carbohydrate-driven mechanism inhibits tnaA expression and
TnaA enzyme activity in Escherichia coli.

Li G(1), Young KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205-7199, USA.

When Escherichia coli is grown in a medium lacking glucose or another preferred
carbohydrate, the concentration of cAMP-cAMP receptor protein (cAMP-CRP)
increases, and this latter complex regulates the expression of more than 180
genes. To respond rapidly to changes in carbohydrate availability, E. coli must
maintain a suitable intracellular concentration of cAMP by either exporting or
degrading excess cAMP. Currently, cAMP export via the TolC protein is thought to 
be more efficient at reducing these levels than is CpdA-mediated degradation of
cAMP. Here, we compared the contributions of TolC and CpdA by measuring the
expression of cAMP-regulated genes that encode tryptophanase (TnaA) and
β-galactosidase. In the presence of exogenous cAMP, a tolC mutant produced
intermediate levels of these enzymes, suggesting that cAMP levels were held in
check by CpdA. Conversely, a cpdA mutant produced much higher amounts of these
enzymes, indicating that CpdA was more efficient than TolC at reducing cAMP
levels. Surprisingly, expression of the tnaA gene halted rapidly when glucose was
added to cells lacking both TolC and CpdA, even though under these conditions
cAMP could not be removed by either pathway and tnaA expression should have
remained high. This result suggests the existence of an additional mechanism that
eliminates intracellular cAMP or terminates expression of some cAMP-CRP-regulated
genes. In addition, adding glucose and other carbohydrates rapidly inhibited the 
function of pre-formed TnaA, indicating that TnaA is regulated by a previously
unknown carbohydrate-dependent post-translational mechanism.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.080705-0 
PMID: 25061041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jan;78(2):411-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

Indole production promotes Escherichia coli mixed-culture growth with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by inhibiting quorum signaling.

Chu W(1), Zere TR, Weber MM, Wood TK, Whiteley M, Hidalgo-Romano B, Valenzuela E 
Jr, McLean RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Science and Technology, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

Indole production by Escherichia coli, discovered in the early 20th century, has 
been used as a diagnostic marker for distinguishing E. coli from other enteric
bacteria. By using transcriptional profiling and competition studies with defined
mutants, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP)-regulated indole formation is a major
factor that enables E. coli growth in mixed biofilm and planktonic populations
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mutants deficient in cAMP production (cyaA) or the
cAMP receptor gene (crp), as well as indole production (tnaA), were not
competitive in coculture with P. aeruginosa but could be restored to wild-type
competitiveness by supplementation with a physiologically relevant indole
concentration. E. coli sdiA mutants, which lacked the receptor for both indole
and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs), showed no change in competitive fitness,
suggesting that indole acted directly on P. aeruginosa. An E. coli tnaA mutant
strain regained wild-type competiveness if grown with P. aeruginosa AHL synthase 
(rhlI and rhlI lasI) mutants. In contrast to the wild type, P. aeruginosa AHL
synthase mutants were unable to degrade indole. Indole produced during
mixed-culture growth inhibited pyocyanin production and other AHL-regulated
virulence factors in P. aeruginosa. Mixed-culture growth with P. aeruginosa
stimulated indole formation in E. coli cpdA, which is unable to regulate cAMP
levels, suggesting the potential for mixed-culture gene activation via cAMP.
These findings illustrate how indole, an early described feature of E. coli
central metabolism, can play a significant role in mixed-culture survival by
inhibiting quorum-regulated competition factors in P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06396-11 
PMCID: PMC3255741
PMID: 22101045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Bacteriol. 2011 Mar;193(5):1086-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.01399-10. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Escherichia coli exports cyclic AMP via TolC.

Hantke K(1), Winkler K, Schultz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazeutische Biochemie, Pharmazeutisches Institut, Universität Tübingen,
Auf der Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. hantke@uni-tuebingen.de

Retraction in
    Hantke K, Winkler K, Schultz JE. J Bacteriol. 2015 Dec 15;197(24):3849.

In Escherichia coli more than 180 genes are regulated by the cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-cAMP receptor protein (CRP) complex. However, more than 90% of cAMP that
is made by intracellular adenylyl cyclases is found in the culture medium. How is
cAMP exported from E. coli? In a tolC mutant, 0.03 mM IPTG
(isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside) was sufficient to induce β-galactosidase
compared to 0.1 mM IPTG in the parent strain. In a cya mutant unable to produce
cAMP about 1 mM extracellular cAMP was required to induce β-galactosidase,
whereas in a cya tolC mutant 0.1 mM cAMP was sufficient. When cAMP in E. coli cya
was generated intracellularly by a recombinant, weakly active adenylyl cyclase
from Corynebacterium glutamicum, the critical level of cAMP necessary for
induction of maltose degradation was only achieved in a tolC mutant and not in
the parent strain. Deletion of a putative cAMP phosphodiesterase of E. coli,
CpdA, resulted in a slightly similar, yet more diffuse phenotype. The data
demonstrate that export of cAMP via TolC is a most efficient way of E. coli to
lower high concentrations of cAMP in the cell and maintain its sensitivity in
changing metabolic environments.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01399-10 
PMCID: PMC3067598
PMID: 21183666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Res Microbiol. 2010 Mar;161(2):158-67. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.12.004. Epub
2010 Jan 4.

Cyclic AMP negatively regulates prodigiosin production by Serratia marcescens.

Kalivoda EJ(1), Stella NA, Aston MA, Fender JE, Thompson PP, Kowalski RP, Shanks 
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Charles T. Campbell Laboratory of Ophthalmic Microbiology, Department of
Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh Eye Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Many Serratia marcescens strains produce the red pigment prodigiosin, which has
antimicrobial and anti-tumor properties. Previous reports suggest that cyclic AMP
(cAMP) is a positive regulator of prodigiosin production. Supporting this model, 
the addition of glucose to growth medium inhibited pigment production in rich and
minimal media. Unexpectedly, we observed highly elevated levels of prodigiosin
production in isogenic strains with mutations in genes involved in cAMP
production (cyaA and crr) and in cAMP-dependent transcriptional signaling (crp). 
Multicopy expression of the Escherichia coli cAMP-phosphodiesterase gene, cpdA,
also conferred a striking increase in prodigiosin production. Exogenous cAMP
decreased both pigment production and pigA-lacZ transcription in the wild-type
(WT) strain, and pigA-lacZ transcription was significantly increased in a crp
mutant relative to WT. Suppressor and epistasis analysis indicate that the
hyperpigment phenotype was dependent upon pigment biosynthetic genes (pigA, pigB,
pigC, pigD and pigM). These experiments establish cAMP as a negative regulator of
prodigiosin production in S. marcescens.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.12.004 
PMCID: PMC2846241
PMID: 20045458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Microbiology (Reading). 2009 May;155(Pt 5):1680-1689. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.026021-0. Epub 2009 Apr 16.

Interplay of cellular cAMP levels, {sigma}S activity and oxidative stress
resistance in Escherichia coli.

Barth E(1), Gora KV(2), Gebendorfer KM(3)(1), Settele F(2), Jakob U(2), Winter
J(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Biotechnologie, Technische Universität München,
Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.
(3)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CiPSM), 81377 Munich, Germany.

Hypochlorous acid (HOCl), the active ingredient of household bleach, functions as
a powerful antimicrobial that is used not only in numerous industrial
applications but also in mammalian host defence. Here we show that multicopy
expression of cpdA, encoding the cAMP phosphodiesterase, leads to a dramatically 
increased resistance of Escherichia coli to HOCl stress as well as to the
unrelated hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) stress. This general oxidative stress
resistance is apparently caused by the CpdA-mediated decrease in cellular cAMP
levels, which leads to the partial inactivation of the global transcriptional
regulator cAMP receptor protein (CRP). Downregulation of CRP in turn causes the
derepression of rpoS, encoding the alternative sigma factor sigma(S), which
activates the general stress response in E. coli. We found that these highly
oxidative stress-resistant cells have a substantially increased capacity to
combat HOCl-mediated insults and to degrade reactive oxygen species. Mutational
analysis revealed that the DNA-protecting protein Dps, the catalase KatE, and the
exonuclease III XthA play the predominant roles in conferring the high resistance
of rpoS-overexpressing strains towards HOCl and H(2)O(2) stress. Our results
demonstrate the close regulatory interplay between cellular cAMP levels, sigma(S)
activity and oxidative stress resistance in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.026021-0 
PMCID: PMC2848814
PMID: 19372151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (glgB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1989 May;171(5):2773-82.

Genetic regulation of glycogen biosynthesis in Escherichia coli: in vitro effects
of cyclic AMP and guanosine 5'-diphosphate 3'-diphosphate and analysis of in vivo
transcripts.

Romeo T(1), Preiss J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824.

Glycogen accumulation in Escherichia coli is inversely related to the growth rate
and occurs most actively when cells enter the stationary phase. The levels of the
three biosynthetic enzymes undergo corresponding changes under these conditions, 
suggesting that genetic control of enzyme biosynthesis may account for at least
part of the regulation (J. Preiss, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 38:419-458, 1984). We
have begun to explore the molecular basis of this control by identifying factors 
which affect the expression of the glycogen genes and by determining the
5'-flanking regions required to mediate the regulatory effects. The in vitro
coupled transcription-translation of two of the biosynthetic genes, glgC
(ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase) and glgA (glycogen synthase), was enhanced up to
26- and 10-fold, respectively, by cyclic AMP (cAMP) and cAMP receptor protein
(CRP). Guanosine 5'-diphosphate 3'-diphosphate stimulated the expression of these
genes 3.6- and 1.8-fold, respectively. The expression of glgB (glycogen branching
enzyme) was affected weakly or negligibly by the above-mentioned compounds.
Assays which measured the in vitro formation of the first dipeptide of glgC
showed that a restriction fragment which contained 0.5 kilobases of DNA upstream 
from the initiation codon supported cAMP-CRP-activated expression.
Sequence-specific binding of cAMP-CRP to a 243-base-pair restriction fragment
from the region upstream from glgC was observed by virtue of the altered
electrophoretic mobility of the bound DNA. S1 nuclease protection analysis
identified 5' termini of four in vivo transcripts within 0.5 kilobases of the
glgC coding region. The relative concentrations of transcripts were higher in the
early stationary phase than in the exponential phase. Two mutants which
overproduced the biosynthesis enzymes accumulated elevated levels of specific
transcripts. The 5' termini of three of the transcripts were mapped to a high
resolution. Their upstream sequences showed weak similarity to the E. coli
consensus promoter. These results suggest complex transcriptional regulation of
the glycogen biosynthesis genes involving multiple promoter sites and direct
control of gene expression by at least two global regulatory systems.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.171.5.2773-2782.1989 
PMCID: PMC209963
PMID: 2468650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (recF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 2009;(4):27-31.

[Antibacterial effects of silver ions: effect on gram-negative bacteria growth
and biofilm formation].

[Article in Russian]

Radtsig MA, Koksharova OA, Khmel' IA.

Minimal inhibiting AgNO3 concentration (MICs) in the gram-negative bacteria
Escherichia coli K12, Serratia proteamaculans 94, and Serratia liquefaciens MG1
were found to be on the average within the range of 0.075-0.3 microg/ml, and for 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 and P. chlororaphis 449, 0.15-0.3 microg/ml. Biofilm 
formation in Escherichia coli AB1157 and S. Proteamaculans 94 was completely
inhibited at an AgNO3 concentration of 0.3 microg/ml, and in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1, at 0.6 microg/mlAgNO3. Mutations in E. coli genes encoding for
global regulators of gene expression, such as sigma S and sigma N subunits of RNA
polymerase, catabolite repression protein CRP, and Lon protease, had no marked
effect on the sensitivity of cells to silver. The wild-type E. coli strains and
strains deficient in excision repair (uvrA, uvrB), SOS-repair or recombination
(recA, lexA, recBC, recF mutants) did not differ in their silver sensitivity.
This suggests that the sensitivity of bacteria to silver does not correlate with 
DNA lesions that could be repaired by these repair and recombination systems. E. 
coli mutant strains deficient in porins OmpF or OmpC, were 3-4-fold more
resistant to silver ions as compared with the wild-type strain. Experiments with 
pME6863 plasmid harboring the gene of N-acyl-homoserine lactonase AiiA
demonstrated that Quorum Sensing regulation (QS) did not participate in the
control of S. proteamaculans 94 and P. chlororaphis 449 silver sensitivity. The
same conclusion was drawn from the comparison of AgNO3 MICs for the S.
liquefaciens wild-type strain and a mutant strain deficient in QS.


PMID: 20017360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (dnaA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biophys Rev. 2016 Sep;8(3):197-207. doi: 10.1007/s12551-016-0204-z. Epub 2016 Jun
10.

Protein-induced DNA linking number change by sequence-specific DNA binding
proteins and its biological effects.

Leng F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Institute and Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,
Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199, USA.
lengf@fiu.edu.

Sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins play essential roles in many fundamental
biological events such as DNA replication, recombination, and transcription. One 
common feature of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins is to introduce
structural changes to their DNA recognition sites including DNA-bending and DNA
linking number change (ΔLk). In this article, I review recent progress in
studying protein-induced ΔLk by several sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins,
such as E. coli cAMP receptor protein (CRP) and lactose repressor (LacI). It was 
demonstrated recently that protein-induced ΔLk is an intrinsic property for
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and does not correlate to protein-induced 
other structural changes, such as DNA bending. For instance, although CRP bends
its DNA recognition site by 90°, it was not able to introduce a ΔLk to it.
However, LacI was able to simultaneously bend and introduce a ΔLk to its DNA
binding sites. Intriguingly, LacI also constrained superhelicity within LacI-lac 
O1 complexes if (-) supercoiled DNA templates were provided. I also discuss how
protein-induced ΔLk help sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins regulate their
biological functions. For example, it was shown recently that LacI utilizes the
constrained superhelicity (ΔLk) in LacI-lac O1 complexes and serves as a
topological barrier to constrain free, unconstrained (-) supercoils within the
401-bp DNA loop. These constrained (-) supercoils enhance LacI's binding affinity
and therefore the repression of the lac promoter. Other biological functions
include how DNA replication initiators λ O and DnaA use the induced ΔLk to
open/melt bacterial DNA replication origins.

DOI: 10.1007/s12551-016-0204-z 
PMCID: PMC5425792
PMID: 28510223 


2. Biophys Rev. 2016 Nov;8(Suppl 1):123-133. doi: 10.1007/s12551-016-0239-1. Epub
2016 Nov 14.

Protein-induced DNA linking number change by sequence-specific DNA binding
proteins and its biological effects.

Leng F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Institute and Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,
Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199, USA.
lengf@fiu.edu.

Sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins play essential roles in many fundamental
biological events such as DNA replication, recombination, and transcription. One 
common feature of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins is to introduce
structural changes to their DNA recognition sites including DNA-bending and DNA
linking number change (ΔLk). In this article, I review recent progress in
studying protein-induced ΔLk by several sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins,
such as E. coli cAMP receptor protein (CRP) and lactose repressor (LacI). It was 
demonstrated recently that protein-induced ΔLk is an intrinsic property for
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and does not correlate to protein-induced 
other structural changes, such as DNA bending. For instance, although CRP bends
its DNA recognition site by 90°, it was not able to introduce a ΔLk to it.
However, LacI was able to simultaneously bend and introduce a ΔLk to its DNA
binding sites. Intriguingly, LacI also constrained superhelicity within LacI-lac 
O1 complexes if (-) supercoiled DNA templates were provided. I also discuss how
protein-induced ΔLk help sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins regulate their
biological functions. For example, it was shown recently that LacI utilizes the
constrained superhelicity (ΔLk) in LacI-lac O1 complexes and serves as a
topological barrier to constrain free, unconstrained (-) supercoils within the
401-bp DNA loop. These constrained (-) supercoils enhance LacI's binding affinity
and therefore the repression of the lac promoter. Other biological functions
include how DNA replication initiators λ O and DnaA use the induced ΔLk to
open/melt bacterial DNA replication origins.

DOI: 10.1007/s12551-016-0239-1 
PMCID: PMC5418508
PMID: 28510217 


3. J Bacteriol. 2009 Oct;191(19):6094-104. doi: 10.1128/JB.00672-09. Epub 2009 Jul
24.

Downregulation of the Escherichia coli guaB promoter by upstream-bound cyclic AMP
receptor protein.

Husnain SI(1), Busby SJ, Thomas MS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.

The Escherichia coli guaB promoter (P(guaB)) is responsible for directing
transcription of the guaB and guaA genes, which specify the biosynthesis of the
nucleotide GMP. P(guaB) is subject to growth rate-dependent control (GRDC) and
possesses an UP element that is required for this regulation. In addition,
P(guaB) contains a discriminator, three binding sites for the nucleoid-associated
protein FIS, and putative binding sites for the regulatory proteins DnaA, PurR,
and cyclic AMP receptor protein (CRP). Here we show that the CRP-cyclic AMP
(cAMP) complex binds to a site located over 100 bp upstream of the guaB
transcription start site, where it serves to downregulate P(guaB). The
CRP-mediated repression of P(guaB) activity increases in media that support lower
growth rates. Inactivation of the crp or cyaA gene or ablation/translocation of
the CRP site relieves repression by CRP and results in a loss of GRDC of P(guaB).
Thus, GRDC of P(guaB) involves a progressive increase in CRP-mediated repression 
of the promoter as the growth rate decreases. Our results also suggest that the
CRP-cAMP complex does not direct GRDC at P(guaB) and that at least one other
regulatory factor is required for conferring GRDC on this promoter. However, PurR
and DnaA are not required for this regulatory mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00672-09 
PMCID: PMC2747903
PMID: 19633076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2000 Jun 15;187(2):115-22.

Regulation of the divergent guaBA and xseA promoters of Escherichia coli by the
cyclic AMP receptor protein.

Hutchings MI(1), Drabble WT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Southampton, Biomedical Sciences Building, Bassett Crescent East,
SO16 7PX, Southampton, UK.

The gua promoter (guaP) of Escherichia coli resembles those for ribosomal RNA
(rrn) operons and lies in a close back-to-back arrangement with the promoter for 
xseA (xseP). Transcription from guaP is subject to stringent control and
growth-rate-dependent regulation, and to repression by DnaA and PurR. In
addition, transcription from guaP is regulated by the cyclic AMP receptor protein
(CRP). Plasmid-borne promoter fusions to the receptor gene for chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase were used to assess the role of CRP in controlling
transcription from guaP and xseP following a downshift of cultures from rich into
minimal medium. CRP is required to activate guaBA transcription and repress xseA 
transcription following downshift. Bandshift assays with a DNA fragment carrying 
the divergent promoters revealed specific binding of CRP. We propose that CRP,
binding to a near-consensus site centred at -117.5, activates transcription from 
guaP and obstructs transcription from the xseA promoter.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2000.tb09146.x 
PMID: 10856643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 1998 Aug;29(4):1091-9.

Transcription of rpoH, encoding the Escherichia coli heat-shock regulator
sigma32, is negatively controlled by the cAMP-CRP/CytR nucleoprotein complex.

Kallipolitis BH(1), Valentin-Hansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Odense University, Denmark.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 1999 Jan;31(1):393.

In Escherichia coli, the rpoH gene encoding the essential heat-shock regulator
sigma32, is expressed in a complex manner. Transcription occurs from four
promoters (P1, P3, P4 and P5) and is modulated by several factors including (i)
two sigma factors (sigma70 and sigmaE); (ii) the global regulator CRP; and (iii) 
the DnaA protein. Here, a further dissection of the rpoH regulatory region has
revealed that an additional transcription control exists that appears to link
rpoH expression to nucleoside metabolism. The cAMP-CRP complex and the CytR
anti-activator bind co-operatively to the promoter region forming a repression
complex that overlaps the sigmaE-dependent P3 promoter and the sigma70-dependent 
P4 and P5 promoters. During steady-state growth conditions with glycerol as the
carbon and energy source, transcription from P3, P4 and P5 is reduced
approximately threefold by CytR, whereas transcription from the upstream
promoter, P1, appears to be unaffected. Furthermore, in strains that slightly
overproduce CytR, transcription from P3, P4 and P5 is reduced even further
(approximately 10-fold), and repression can be fully neutralized by the addition 
of the inducer cytidine to the growth medium. In the induced state, P4 is the
strongest promoter and, together with P3 and P5, it is responsible for most rpoH 
transcription (65-70%). At present, CytR has been shown to 'fine tune'
transcription of two genes (rpoH and ppiA) that are connected with
protein-folding activities. These findings suggest that additional assistance in 
protein folding is required under conditions in which CytR is induced (i.e. in
the presence of nucleosides).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.00999.x 
PMID: 9767576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Microbiology (Reading). 1996 Sep;142 ( Pt 9):2429-37.

Stringent and growth-rate-dependent control of the gua operon of Escherichia coli
K-12.

Davies IJ(1), Drabble WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Southampton, UK.

The promoter of the gua operon has been located by transcript mapping using
primer extension with reverse transcriptase. The surrounding nucleotide sequence 
has features characteristic of promoters under stringent and
growth-rate-dependent regulation, namely a GC-rich discriminator next to the -10 
hexamer, an upstream AT-rich sequence (the UP element) and potential FIS-binding 
sites. Transcriptional activity of the gua promoter was examined using
transcriptional fusions to lacZ placed at a single chromosomal location.
Expression from gua was reduced under stringent conditions in vivo, and varied
with growth rate. Growth-rate control was independent of guanine-mediated
repression. A fusion in which the GC-rich discriminator was mutated by insertion 
of an AT-rich oligonucleotide was used to demonstrate the importance of this
region in control. Both stringent and growth-rate-dependent controls were
abolished by the mutation. Other potential regulatory signals in the vicinity of 
the gua promoter are a pur operator (binding site for the PurR repressor), a gua 
operator, a DnaA-binding site and a CRP/FNR-binding sequence. The gua promoter
lies back-to-back with the promoter for xseA (exonuclease VII), the two promoters
being separated by only 20 bp.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-142-9-2429 
PMID: 8828209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (dcuS)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Proteomics. 2020 Feb 10;212:103583. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2019.103583. Epub 2019
Nov 14.

Fumarate dependent protein composition under aerobic and anaerobic growth
conditions in Escherichia coli.

Surmann K(1), Stopp M(2), Wörner S(2), Dhople VM(1), Völker U(1), Unden G(2),
Hammer E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes,
University Medicine Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17475 Greifswald,
Germany.
(2)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Becherweg 15, 55128 Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes,
University Medicine Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17475 Greifswald,
Germany. Electronic address: hammer@uni-greifswald.de.

In the absence of sugars, C4-dicarboxylates (C4DC) like fumarate represent
important substrates for growth of Escherichia coli. Aerobically, C4DCs are
oxidized to CO2 whereas anaerobically, C4DCs are used for fumarate respiration.
In order to determine the impact of fumarate under aerobic and anaerobic
conditions, proteomes of E. coli W3110 grown aerobically or anaerobically with
fumarate and/or the non-C4DC substrate glycerol were comparatively profiled by
nanoLC-MS/MS. Membrane enrichment allowed sensitive detection of membrane
proteins. A total of 1657 proteins of which 646 and 374 were assigned to the
cytosol or membrane, respectively, were covered. Presence of fumarate triggered
changes (≥ 2fold) to the levels of 211 and 76 proteins under aerobic and
anaerobic growth, respectively. The fumarate induced changes included proteins
encoded by genes regulated by the C4DC two-component system DcuS-DcuR (DctA,
DcuB, FumB, FrdABC proteins) catalyzing uptake and initial catabolic steps. Many 
of the proteins displaying altered levels are not part of the DcuS-DcuR regulon, 
including proteins of citric acid cycle and associated pathways (aerobic),
proteins involved in motility and chemotaxis (anaerobic), and oxidative stress.
Their genes are mostly preceded by cAMP receptor protein (CRP) sites, some by
DcuR-like sites. Testing of selected genes confirmed regulation by CRP and
DcuS-DcuR. SIGNIFICANCE: Global protein profiling of the soluble and the membrane
fraction provides a comprehensive view on the protein pattern of E. coli grown
aerobically and anaerobically with or without fumarate. The results disclose
during aerobic growth besides the known impact of the C4-dicarboxylates (C4DC) on
carbon utilization and citric acid cycle major adaptations in amino acid
metabolism. In contrast, protein alterations in the presence of fumarate under
anaerobic conditions point to enhanced motility and chemotaxis. Only proteins
(transporters, initial metabolic steps) feeding external C4DCs to the central
pathways were regulated by the C4DC two-component system DcuS-DcuR, whereas other
protein levels were controlled in an indirect manner by CRP triggered catabolite 
control and other mechanisms. Consequently, metabolic and transcriptional
regulation by C4DCs is apparently effected by a network of the DcuS-DcuR system
with important contribution by catabolite control.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2019.103583 
PMID: 31734389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2009 Sep;56(3):211-27. doi:
10.1556/AMicr.56.2009.3.2.

RpoS-independent and growth phase-dependent expression of dcuSR operon of
Escherichia coli.

Abo-Amer AE(1), Altalhi AD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Taif Department of Biology, Faculty of Science Taif Saudi Arabia
Kingdom. abo-amer@lycos.com

The dcuSR operon of Escherichia coli encodes a two-component
sensor/kinase-response/regulator system. This system regulates gene expression in
response to external C 4 -dicarboxylates. During entry into stationary phase
Gram-negative bacteria express genes that impart cellular resistance to
environmental stresses. In E. coli , 50 or more genes are triggered by sigma
factor ( sigma s ) during entry into stationary phase. Multi-copy dcuS-lacZ and
chromosomally integrated dcuS-lacZ fusions analysis showed that the expression of
dcuSR is positively regulated during growth phase. Many genes that are required
for stationary-phase adaptation are controlled by RpoS, a conserved alternative
sigma factor, whose expression is, in turn, controlled by many factors. To
understand whether the dcuSR is dependent upon RpoS, a RpoS- dcuS-lacZ strain was
generated. beta -Galactosidase assay and Western blot analysis reported that the 
generated RpoS- dcuS-lacZ strain and the wild type showed the same expression
during stationary phase. Surprisingly, the growth phase-dependence of the
expression of dcuSR is still present in RpoS- dcuS-lacZ strain suggesting that
other growth-phase-dependent regulatory mechanisms (might be the DcuSR system or 
cAMP/CRP), in addition to RpoS, may control post-exponential dcuSR expression.

DOI: 10.1556/AMicr.56.2009.3.2 
PMID: 19789137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Microbiol. 2007 Jun;45(3):234-40.

Expression of Escherichia coli DcuS-R two-component regulatory system is
regulated by the secondary internal promoter which is activated by CRP-cAMP.

Oyamada T(1), Yokoyama K, Morinaga M, Suzuki M, Makino K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, National Defense Academy of Japan, Yokosuka, 
Japan.

The DcuS-R two-component system of Escherichia coli senses C4-dicarboxylates of
the medium and regulates expression of the genes related to utilization of them. 
It is known that phospho-DcuR induces expression of genes such as the dcuB-fumB
operon, the frdABCD operon, and the dctA gene. We analyzed promoters of the
dcuS-R operon to elucidate the transcriptional regulation system. We found a
novel internal promoter within the dcuS gene that is regulated by the
transcriptional regulator, CRP-cAMP, in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions.


PMID: 17618229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 1999 Sep;181(18):5624-35.

Inactivation and regulation of the aerobic C(4)-dicarboxylate transport (dctA)
gene of Escherichia coli.

Davies SJ(1), Golby P, Omrani D, Broad SA, Harrington VL, Guest JR, Kelly DJ,
Andrews SC.

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

The gene (dctA) encoding the aerobic C(4)-dicarboxylate transporter (DctA) of
Escherichia coli was previously mapped to the 79-min region of the linkage map.
The nucleotide sequence of this region reveals two candidates for the dctA gene: 
f428 at 79.3 min and the o157a-o424-o328 (or orfQMP) operon at 79.9 min. The f428
gene encodes a homologue of the Sinorhizobium meliloti and Rhizobium
leguminosarum H(+)/C(4)-dicarboxylate symporter, DctA, whereas the orfQMP operon 
encodes homologues of the aerobic periplasmic-binding protein- dependent
C(4)-dicarboxylate transport system (DctQ, DctM, and DctP) of Rhodobacter
capsulatus. To determine which, if either, of these loci specify the E. coli DctA
system, the chromosomal f428 and orfM genes were inactivated by inserting Sp(r)
or Ap(r) cassettes, respectively. The resulting f428 mutant was unable to grow
aerobically with fumarate or malate as the sole carbon source and grew poorly
with succinate. Furthermore, fumarate uptake was abolished in the f428 mutant and
succinate transport was approximately 10-fold lower than that of the wild type.
The growth and fumarate transport deficiencies of the f428 mutant were
complemented by transformation with an f428-containing plasmid. No growth defect 
was found for the orfM mutant. In combination, the above findings confirm that
f428 corresponds to the dctA gene and indicate that the orfQMP products play no
role in C(4)-dicarboxylate transport. Regulation studies with a dctA-lacZ
(f428-lacZ) transcriptional fusion showed that dctA is subject to cyclic AMP
receptor protein (CRP)-dependent catabolite repression and ArcA-mediated
anaerobic repression and is weakly induced by the DcuS-DcuR system in response to
C(4)-dicarboxylates and citrate. Interestingly, in a dctA mutant, expression of
dctA is constitutive with respect to C(4)-dicarboxylate induction, suggesting
that DctA regulates its own synthesis. Northern blot analysis revealed a single, 
monocistronic dctA transcript and confirmed that dctA is subject to regulation by
catabolite repression and CRP. Reverse transcriptase-mediated primer extension
indicated a single transcriptional start site centered 81 bp downstream of a
strongly predicted CRP-binding site.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.18.5624-5635.1999 
PMCID: PMC94081
PMID: 10482502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (frdC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biochem J. 1984 Sep 1;222(2):519-34.

Nucleotide sequence encoding the flavoprotein and hydrophobic subunits of the
succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli.

Wood D, Darlison MG, Wilde RJ, Guest JR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 3614 base-pair segment of DNA containing the sdhA
gene, encoding the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia
coli, and two genes sdhC and sdhD, encoding small hydrophobic subunits, has been 
determined. Together with the iron-sulphur protein gene (sdhB) these genes form
an operon (sdhCDAB) situated between the citrate synthase gene (gltA) and the
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex genes (sucAB): gltA-sdhCDAB-sucAB.
Transcription of the gltA and sdhCDAB gene appears to diverge from a single
intergenic region that contains two pairs of potential promoter sequences and two
putative CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein)-binding sites. The sdhA structural
gene comprises 1761 base-pairs (587 codons, excluding the initiation codon, AUG) 
and it encodes a polypeptide of Mr 64268 that is strikingly homologous with the
flavoprotein subunit of fumarate reductase (frdA gene product). The FAD-binding
region, including the histidine residue at the FAD-attachment site, has been
identified by its homology with other flavoproteins and with the flavopeptide of 
the bovine heart mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase. Potential active-site
cysteine and histidine residues have also been indicated by the comparisons. The 
sdhC (384 base-pairs) and sdhD (342 base-pairs) structural genes encode two
strongly hydrophobic proteins of Mr 14167 and 12792 respectively. These proteins 
resemble in size and composition, but not sequence, the membrane anchor proteins 
of fumarate reductase (the frdC and frdD gene products).

DOI: 10.1042/bj2220519 
PMCID: PMC1144207
PMID: 6383359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((crp) AND (frdA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biochem J. 1984 Sep 1;222(2):519-34.

Nucleotide sequence encoding the flavoprotein and hydrophobic subunits of the
succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli.

Wood D, Darlison MG, Wilde RJ, Guest JR.

The nucleotide sequence of a 3614 base-pair segment of DNA containing the sdhA
gene, encoding the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia
coli, and two genes sdhC and sdhD, encoding small hydrophobic subunits, has been 
determined. Together with the iron-sulphur protein gene (sdhB) these genes form
an operon (sdhCDAB) situated between the citrate synthase gene (gltA) and the
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex genes (sucAB): gltA-sdhCDAB-sucAB.
Transcription of the gltA and sdhCDAB gene appears to diverge from a single
intergenic region that contains two pairs of potential promoter sequences and two
putative CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein)-binding sites. The sdhA structural
gene comprises 1761 base-pairs (587 codons, excluding the initiation codon, AUG) 
and it encodes a polypeptide of Mr 64268 that is strikingly homologous with the
flavoprotein subunit of fumarate reductase (frdA gene product). The FAD-binding
region, including the histidine residue at the FAD-attachment site, has been
identified by its homology with other flavoproteins and with the flavopeptide of 
the bovine heart mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase. Potential active-site
cysteine and histidine residues have also been indicated by the comparisons. The 
sdhC (384 base-pairs) and sdhD (342 base-pairs) structural genes encode two
strongly hydrophobic proteins of Mr 14167 and 12792 respectively. These proteins 
resemble in size and composition, but not sequence, the membrane anchor proteins 
of fumarate reductase (the frdC and frdD gene products).

DOI: 10.1042/bj2220519 
PMCID: PMC1144207
PMID: 6383359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (acrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biochem. 2021 Feb 6;169(1):101-108. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100.

BaeR participates in cephalosporins susceptibility by regulating the expression
level of outer membrane proteins in Escherichia coli.

Wang S(1), You C(2), Memon FQ(1), Zhang G(1), Sun Y(3), Si H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning 530005, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangxi Nongken Yongxin Animal Husbandry Group Xijiang Co. LTD, Guigang
537000, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Institute of Science 
and Technology, Xinxiang 453003, People's Republic of China.

The two-component system BaeSR participates in antibiotics resistance of
Escherichia coli. To know whether the outer membrane proteins involve in the
antibiotics resistance mediated by BaeSR, deletion of acrB was constructed and
the recombined plasmid p-baeR was introduced into E. coli K12 and K12△acrB.
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of antibacterial agents were determined 
by 2-fold broth micro-dilution method. Gene expressions related with major outer 
membrane proteins and multidrug efflux pump-related genes were determined by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The
results revealed that the MICs of K12ΔacrB to the tested drugs except for
gentamycin and amikacin decreased 2- to 16.75-folds compared with those of K12.
When BaeR was overexpressed, the MICs of K12ΔacrB/p-baeR to ceftiofur and
cefotaxime increased 2.5- and 2-fold, respectively, compared with their
corresponding that of K12△acrB. At the same time, the expression levels of ompC, 
ompF, ompW, ompA and ompX showed significant reduction in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR as
compared with K12△acrB. Moreover, the expression levels of ompR, marA, rob and
tolC also significantly 'decreased' in K12ΔacrB/p-baeR. These findings indicated 
that BaeR overproduction can decrease cephalosporins susceptibility in acrB-free 
E. coli by decreasing the expression level of outer membrane proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvaa100 
PMID: 32882009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (acrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (galU)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mSphere. 2021 Dec 22;6(6):e0077821. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00778-21. Epub 2021 Nov 
17.

Identification of Multiple Low-Level Resistance Determinants and Coselection of
Motility Impairment upon Sub-MIC Ceftriaxone Exposure in Escherichia coli.

Ching C(1), Zaman MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Resistance to third-generation cephalosporins among Gram-negative bacteria is a
rapidly growing public health threat. Among the most commonly used
third-generation cephalosporins is ceftriaxone. Bacterial exposure to sublethal
or sub-MIC antibiotic concentrations occurs widely, from environmental residues
to intermittently at the site of infection. Quality of ceftriaxone is also a
concern, especially in low- and middle-income countries, with medicines having
inappropriate active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) content or concentration.
While focus has been largely on extended-spectrum β-lactamases and high-level
resistance, there are limited data on specific chromosomal mutations and other
pathways that contribute to ceftriaxone resistance under these conditions. In
this work, Escherichia coli cells were exposed to a broad range of sub-MICs of
ceftriaxone and mutants were analyzed using whole-genome sequencing. Low-level
ceftriaxone resistance emerged after as low as 10% MIC exposure, with the
frequency of resistance development increasing with concentration. Genomic
analyses of mutants revealed multiple genetic bases. Mutations were enriched in
genes associated with porins (envZ, ompF, ompC, and ompR), efflux regulation
(marR), and the outer membrane and metabolism (galU and pgm), but none were
associated with the ampC β-lactamase. We also observed selection of mgrB
mutations. Notably, pleiotropic effects on motility and cell surface were
selected for in multiple independent genes, which may have important
consequences. Swift low-level resistance development after exposure to low
ceftriaxone concentrations may result in reservoirs of bacteria with relevant
mutations for survival and increased resistance. Thus, initiatives for broader
surveillance of low-level antibiotic resistance and genomic resistance
determinants should be pursued when resources are available. IMPORTANCE
Ceftriaxone is a widely consumed antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections.
Bacteria, however, are increasingly becoming resistant to ceftriaxone. Most work 
has focused on known mechanisms associated with high-level ceftriaxone
resistance. However, bacteria are extensively exposed to low antibiotic
concentrations, and there are limited data on the evolution of ceftriaxone
resistance under these conditions. In this work, we observed that bacteria
quickly developed low-level resistance due to both novel and previously described
mutations in multiple different genes upon exposure to low ceftriaxone
concentrations. Additionally, exposure also led to changes in motility and the
cell surface, which can impact other processes associated with resistance and
infection. Notably, low-level-resistant bacteria would be missed in the clinic,
which uses set breakpoints. While they may require increased resources, this work
supports continued initiatives for broader surveillance of low-level antibiotic
resistance or their resistance determinants, which can serve as predictors of
higher risk for clinical resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00778-21 
PMCID: PMC8597738
PMID: 34787446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (uvrC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Mol Evol. 1989 Jun;28(6):545-52.

Two new members of the OmpR superfamily detected by homology to a sensor-binding 
core domain.

Timme TL(1), Lawrence CB, Moses RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The OmpR superfamily includes proteins that act as transcriptional regulators of 
operons that respond to environmental stimuli. A homologous domain near the
N-terminus, termed a sensor-binding core domain, is thought to play a role in
recognition of a signal transduction protein. We have identified two previously
unrecognized members of this regulator family of proteins: a 23.8-kd protein
transcribed from the uvrC transcription unit and the PgtA gene product, which is 
a phosphoglycerate transport regulatory protein. The sensor-binding core domain
is also present in four proteins that regulate bacterial sporulation and
chemotaxis. The 23.8-kd protein also has sequence similarity to elongation factor
Tu and two regulatory proteins: HtpR, the heat-shock regulatory protein, and
TraJ, a regulator of expression of genes involved in conjugation. There is a
77-amino acid region near the C-terminus of the 23.8-kd protein that has 30%
similarity with a 28.1-kd protein coded for by an open reading frame 5' to the
reading frame of the 23.8-kd protein in the uvrC transcription unit. Genetic
distance analysis of amino acid sequences of proteins with a sensor-binding core 
domain suggests that the 23.8-kd protein and the chemotaxis regulatory proteins
are distantly related to the other regulatory proteins in the OmpR superfamily.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02602935 
PMID: 2549258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((ompR) AND (uvrY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 Oct;46(1):281-91.

Transcriptome analysis of all two-component regulatory system mutants of
Escherichia coli K-12.

Oshima T(1), Aiba H, Masuda Y, Kanaya S, Sugiura M, Wanner BL, Mori H, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Education Center for Genetic Information, Nara Institute of
Science and Technology, Ikoma 630-0101, Japan.

We have systematically examined the mRNA profiles of 36 two-component deletion
mutants, which include all two-component regulatory systems of Escherichia coli, 
under a single growth condition. DNA microarray results revealed that the mutants
belong to one of three groups based on their gene expression profiles in
Luria-Bertani broth under aerobic conditions: (i) those with no or little change;
(ii) those with significant changes; and (iii) those with drastic changes. Under 
these conditions, the anaeroresponsive ArcB/ArcA system, the osmoresponsive
EnvZ/OmpR system and the response regulator UvrY showed the most drastic changes.
Cellular functions such as flagellar synthesis and expression of the RpoS regulon
were affected by multiple two-component systems. A high correlation coefficient
of expression profile was found between several two-component mutants. Together, 
these results support the view that a network of functional interactions, such as
cross-regulation, exists between different two-component systems. The compiled
data are avail-able at our website (http://ecoli.aist-nara.ac.jp/xp_analysis/
2_components).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03170.x 
PMID: 12366850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((gadX) AND (deaD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Commun Biol. 2019 Jul 11;2:259. doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0509-0. eCollection 2019.

Forecasting cell fate during antibiotic exposure using stochastic gene
expression.

Rossi NA(#)(1)(2), El Meouche I(#)(2)(3), Dunlop MJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Molecular Biology, Cell Biology & Biochemistry Program, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215 USA.
(2)2Biological Design Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA.
(3)3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Commun Biol. 2019 Aug 30;2:330.

Antibiotic killing does not occur at a single, precise time for all cells within 
a population. Variability in time to death can be caused by stochastic expression
of genes, resulting in differences in endogenous stress-resistance levels between
individual cells in a population. Here we investigate whether single-cell
differences in gene expression prior to antibiotic exposure are related to cell
survival times after antibiotic exposure for a range of genes of diverse
function. We quantified the time to death of single cells under antibiotic
exposure in combination with expression of reporters. For some reporters,
including genes involved in stress response and cellular processes like
metabolism, the time to cell death had a strong relationship with the initial
expression level of the genes. Our results highlight the single-cell level
non-uniformity of antibiotic killing and also provide examples of key genes where
cell-to-cell variation in expression is strongly linked to extended durations of 
antibiotic survival.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-019-0509-0 
PMCID: PMC6624276
PMID: 31312728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.


############# ((gadX) AND (rpoC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2017 May 31;83(12). pii: e00442-17. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00442-17. Print 2017 Jun 15.

Acid Evolution of Escherichia coli K-12 Eliminates Amino Acid Decarboxylases and 
Reregulates Catabolism.

He A(1), Penix SR(1), Basting PJ(1), Griffith JM(1), Creamer KE(1), Camperchioli 
D(1), Clark MW(1), Gonzales AS(1), Chávez Erazo JS(1), George NS(2), Bhagwat
AA(2), Slonczewski JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA.
(2)Environmental Microbiology and Food Safety Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA
slonczewski@kenyon.edu.

Acid-adapted strains of Escherichia coli K-12 W3110 were obtained by serial
culture in medium buffered at pH 4.6 (M. M. Harden, A. He, K. Creamer, M. W.
Clark, I. Hamdallah, K. A. Martinez, R. L. Kresslein, S. P. Bush, and J. L.
Slonczewski, Appl Environ Microbiol 81:1932-1941, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03494-14). Revised genomic analysis of these strains 
revealed insertion sequence (IS)-driven insertions and deletions that knocked out
regulators CadC (acid induction of lysine decarboxylase), GadX (acid induction of
glutamate decarboxylase), and FNR (anaerobic regulator). Each acid-evolved strain
showed loss of one or more amino acid decarboxylase systems, which normally help 
neutralize external acid (pH 5 to 6) and increase survival in extreme acid (pH
2). Strains from populations B11, H9, and F11 had an IS5 insertion or IS-mediated
deletion in cadC, while population B11 had a point mutation affecting the
arginine activator adiY The cadC and adiY mutants failed to neutralize acid in
the presence of exogenous lysine or arginine. In strain B11-1, reversion of an
rpoC (RNA polymerase) mutation partly restored arginine-dependent neutralization.
All eight strains showed deletion or downregulation of the Gad acid fitness
island. Strains with the Gad deletion lost the ability to produce GABA
(gamma-aminobutyric acid) and failed to survive extreme acid. Transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) of strain B11-1 showed upregulated genes for catabolism of
diverse substrates but downregulated acid stress genes (the biofilm regulator
ariR, yhiM, and Gad). Other strains showed downregulation of H2 consumption
mediated by hydrogenases (hya and hyb) which release acid. Strains F9-2 and F9-3 
had a deletion of fnr and showed downregulation of FNR-dependent genes (dmsABC,
frdABCD, hybABO, nikABCDE, and nrfAC). Overall, strains that had evolved in
buffered acid showed loss or downregulation of systems that neutralize unbuffered
acid and showed altered regulation of catabolism.IMPORTANCE Experimental
evolution of an enteric bacterium under a narrow buffered range of acid pH leads 
to loss of genes that enhance fitness above or below the buffered pH range,
including loss of enzymes that may raise external pH in the absence of buffer.
Prominent modes of evolutionary change involve IS-mediated insertions and
deletions that knock out key regulators. Over generations of acid stress,
catabolism undergoes reregulation in ways that differ for each evolving strain.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00442-17 
PMCID: PMC5452808
PMID: 28389540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((dnaA) AND (gyrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2005 Jun;99(6):603-10.

Organization and localization of the dnaA and dnaK gene regions on the
multichromosomal genome of Burkholderia multivorans ATCC 17616.

Nagata Y(1), Matsuda M, Komatsu H, Imura Y, Sawada H, Ohtsubo Y, Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Sendai
980-8577, Japan. aynaga@ige.tohoku.ac.jp

The Burkholderia multivorans strain ATCC 17616 carries three circular chromosomes
with sizes of 3.4, 2.5, and 0.9 Mb. To reveal the distribution and organization
of the genes for fundamental cell functions on the genome of this bacterium, the 
dnaA and dnaK gene regions of ATCC 17616 were cloned and characterized. The gene 
organization of the dnaA region was rnpA-rmpH-dnaA-dnaN-gyrB with a single
consensus DnaA-binding box (TTATCCACA) between the rmpH and dnaA genes. This
intergenic region, however, did not work as an autonomously replicating sequence 
in ATCC 17616. On the other hand, the gene organization of the dnaK region was
grpE-orf1 (gene for thioredoxin homologue)-dnaK-dnaJ-pabB (gene for
p-aminobenzoate synthetase component homologue). A putative heat-shock promoter
that showed good homology to the sigma32-dependent promoter consensus sequence in
Escherichia coli was found upstream of the grpE gene, suggesting that these five 
genes constitute an operon. In M9 succinate minimal medium the dnaJ mutant grew
more slowly than the wild-type strain, indicating that this operon is functional.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and Southern blot analyses indicated that both
the dnaA and dnaK gene regions exist as single copies on the 3.4 Mb chromosome.

DOI: 10.1263/jbb.99.603 
PMID: 16233838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Jun;68(6):2924-33.

oriC region and replication termination site, dif, of the Xanthomonas campestris 
pv. campestris 17 chromosome.

Yen MR(1), Lin NT, Hung CH, Choy KT, Weng SF, Tseng YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

A 13-kb DNA fragment containing oriC and the flanking genes thdF, orf900, yidC,
rnpA, rpmH, oriC, dnaA, dnaN, recF, and gyrB was cloned from the gram-negative
plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris 17. These genes are
conserved in order with other eubacterial oriC genes and code for proteins that
share high degrees of identity with their homologues, except for orf900, which
has a homologue only in Xylella fastidiosa. The dnaA/dnaN intergenic region (273 
bp) identified to be the minimal oriC region responsible for autonomous
replication has 10 pure AT clusters of four to seven bases and only three
consensus DnaA boxes. These findings are in disagreement with the notion that
typical oriCs contain four or more DnaA boxes located upstream of the dnaA gene. 
The X. campestris pv. campestris 17 attB site required for site-specific
integration of cloned fragments from filamentous phage phiLf replicative form DNA
was identified to be a dif site on the basis of similarities in nucleotide
sequence and function with the Escherichia coli dif site required for chromosome 
dimer resolution and whose deletion causes filamentation of the cells. The oriC
and dif sites were located at 12:00 and 6:00, respectively, on the circular X.
campestris pv. campestris 17 chromosome map, similar to the locations found for
E. coli sites. Computer searches revealed the presence of both the dif site and
XerC/XerD recombinase homologues in 16 of the 42 fully sequenced eubacterial
genomes, but eight of the dif sites are located far away from the 6:00 point
instead of being placed opposite the cognate oriC. The differences in the
relative position suggest that mechanisms different from that of E. coli may
participate in the control of chromosome replication.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.6.2924-2933.2002 
PMCID: PMC123971
PMID: 12039751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(16):4860-5.

Conserved promoter motif is required for cell cycle timing of dnaX transcription 
in Caulobacter.

Keiler KC(1), Shapiro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

Cells use highly regulated transcriptional networks to control temporally
regulated events. In the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus, many cellular
processes are temporally regulated with respect to the cell cycle, and the genes 
required for these processes are expressed immediately before the products are
needed. Genes encoding factors required for DNA replication, including dnaX,
dnaA, dnaN, gyrB, and dnaK, are induced at the G(1)/S-phase transition. By
analyzing mutations in the dnaX promoter, we identified a motif between the -10
and -35 regions that is required for proper timing of gene expression. This
motif, named RRF (for repression of replication factors), is conserved in the
promoters of other coordinately induced replication factors. Because mutations in
the RRF motif result in constitutive gene expression throughout the cell cycle,
this sequence is likely to be the binding site for a cell cycle-regulated
transcriptional repressor. Consistent with this hypothesis, Caulobacter extracts 
contain an activity that binds specifically to the RRF in vitro.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.16.4860-4865.2001 
PMCID: PMC99540
PMID: 11466289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 1;29(11):2251-9.

Identification of a putative chromosomal replication origin from Helicobacter
pylori and its interaction with the initiator protein DnaA.

Zawilak A(1), Cebrat S, Mackiewicz P, Król-Hulewicz A, Jakimowicz D, Messer W,
Gosciniak G, Zakrzewska-Czerwinska J.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Weigla 12, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.

The key elements of the initiation of Helicobacter pylori chromosome replication,
DnaA protein and putative oriC region, have been characterized. The gene
arrangement in the H.pylori dnaA region differs from that found in many other
eubacterial dnaA regions (rnpA-rmpH-dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB). Helicobacter pylori
dnaA is flanked by two open reading frames with unknown function, while dnaN-gyrB
and rnpA-rmpH loci are separated from the dnaA gene by 600 and 90 kb,
respectively. We show that the dnaA gene encoding initiator protein DnaA is
expressed in H.pylori cells. The H.pylori DnaA protein, like other DnaA proteins,
can be divided into four domains. Here we demonstrate that the C-terminal domain 
of H.pylori DnaA protein is responsible for DNA binding. Using in silico and in
vitro studies, the putative oriC region containing five DnaA boxes has been
located upstream of the dnaA gene. DNase I and gel retardation analyses show that
the C-terminal domain of H.pylori DnaA protein specifically binds each of five
DnaA boxes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.11.2251 
PMCID: PMC55718
PMID: 11376143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1999 Jun;63(6):1134-7.

Replication origin region of the chromosome of alkaliphilic Bacillus halodurans
C-125.

Takami H(1), Masui N, Nakasone K, Horikoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Deep-sea Microorganisms Research Group, Japan Marine Science and Technology
Center, Kanagawa, Japan. takamih@jamstec.go.jp

An 18.5-kb DNA fragment containing the oriC region of the chromosome of the
alkaliphilic Bacillus halodurans C-125 was obtained by PCR and sequenced. Sixteen
open reading frames (ORFs) were identified in this region. A sequencing
similarity search using the BSORF database found that ORF1 to 13 all had
significant similarities to gene products of Bacillus subtilis. Three other ORFs 
(ORF14-16) of unknown function were positioned down-stream of gyrB instead of
rrnO, which is found in the same region in the case of B. subtilis. The ORF
organization from gidA to gyrA was the same as that of B. subtilis. The gene
organization and the location of the DnaA-box region were also similar to those
of the chromosomes of other bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas
putida. There were two DnaA-box clusters (Box-region C and R) with a consensus
sequence TTATCCACA on both sides of the dnaA gene but another DnaA box cluster
(Box-region L) which is found in the region between thdF and jag in B. subtilis
was not found in the corresponding region in the case of alkaliphilic Bacillus
halodurans C-125.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.63.1134 
PMID: 10427704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Microbiol. 1998 Mar;36(3):158-63.

Sequence analysis of a 34.7-kb DNA segment from the genome of Buchnera aphidicola
(endosymbiont of aphids) containing groEL, dnaA, the atp operon, gidA, and rho.

Clark MA(1), Baumann L, Baumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, University of California, Davis, CA 95616-8665, USA.

Buchnera aphidicola is a prokaryotic endosymbiont of the aphid Schizaphis
graminum. From past and present nucleotide sequence analyses of the B. aphidicola
genome, we have assembled a 34. 7-kilobase (kb) DNA segment. This segment
contains genes coding for 32 open reading frames (ORFs), which corresponded to
89.9% of the DNA. All of these ORFs could be identified with homologous regions
of the Escherichia coli genome. The order of the genes with established functions
was groELS-trmE-rnpA-rpmH-dnaA-dnaN-gyrB-atpCDGAH FEB-gidA-fdx-hscA-
hscB-nifS-ilvDC-rep-trxA-rho. The order of genes in small DNA fragments was
conserved in both B. aphidicola and E. coli. Most of these fragments were in
approximately the same region of the E. coli genome. The latter organism,
however, contained many additional inserted genes within and between the
fragments. The results of the B. aphidicola genome analyses indicate that the
endosymbiont has many properties of free-living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00006760 
PMID: 9516544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. DNA Res. 1996 Dec 31;3(6):415-9.

Structure of the dnaA region of the endosymbiont, Buchnera aphidicola, of aphid
Schizaphis graminum.

Hassan AK(1), Moriya S, Baumann P, Yoshikawa H, Ogasawara N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan.

Buchnera aphidicola is an intracellular prokaryote (endosymbiont) that lives in
the body cavity of the aphid. Phylogenetic studies indicated that it is closely
related to Escherichia coli and members of Enterobacteria. The gene order of the 
region containing the dnaA gene is well conserved in many bacteria. Seven genes
of the endosymbiont of the aphid Schizaphis graminum, gyrB, dnaN, dnaA, rpmH,
rnpA, yidD, and 60K. were found to be homologous in sequence and relative
location to those of E. coli. We have further sequenced the region downstream of 
the 60K gene to elucidate the boundary of the conserved region, and found that
one more gene, thdF, is conserved. The comparison of gene organizations of the
dnaA region of the related bacteria supported the close phylogenetic relationship
of B. aphidicola to E. coli. In addition, we have identified groES and groEL
genes next to the thdF gene. GroEL protein was reported to be expressed at an
elevated level in the endosymbionts of aphids, and is considered to play an
important role in their association with the aphid host. Comparison of the
structure of the groE operon with that of the endosymbiont of the aphid
Acyrthosiphon pisum revealed the conservation of a sequence resembling the E.
coli consensus heat shock promoter, and this sequence may be responsible for the 
high expression of the groEL gene in aphid endosymbionts.

DOI: 10.1093/dnares/3.6.415 
PMID: 9097044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Apr;20(2):283-93.

Organization of the origins of replication of the chromosomes of Mycobacterium
smegmatis, Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium tuberculosis and isolation of a
functional origin from M. smegmatis.

Salazar L(1), Fsihi H, de Rossi E, Riccardi G, Rios C, Cole ST, Takiff HE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones
Científicas (IVIC), Caracas, Venezuela.

The genus Mycobacterium is composed of species with widely differing growth rates
ranging from approximately three hours in Mycobacterium smegmatis to two weeks in
Mycobacterium leprae. As DNA replication is coupled to cell duplication, it may
be regulated by common mechanisms. The chromosomal regions surrounding the
origins of DNA replication from M. smegmatis, M. tuberculosis, and M. leprae have
been sequenced, and show very few differences. The gene order,
rnpA-rpmH-dnaA-dnaN-recF-orf-gyrB-gyrA, is the same as in other Gram-positive
organisms. Although the general organization in M. smegmatis is very similar to
that of Streptomyces spp., a closely related genus, M. tuberculosis and M. leprae
differ as they lack an open reading frame, between dnaN and recF, which is
similar to the gnd gene of Escherichia coli. Within the three mycobacterial
species, there is extensive sequence conservation in the intergenic regions
flanking dnaA, but more variation from the consensus DnaA box sequence was seen
than in other bacteria. By means of subcloning experiments, the putative
chromosomal origin of replication of M. smegmatis, containing the dnaA-dnaN
region, was shown to promote autonomous replication in M. smegmatis, unlike the
corresponding regions from M. tuberculosis or M. leprae.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1996.tb02617.x 
PMID: 8733228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Gen Genet. 1995 Mar 20;246(6):680-6.

Nucleotide sequence of the recF gene cluster from Staphylococcus aureus and
complementation analysis in Bacillus subtilis recF mutants.

Alonso JC(1), Fisher LM.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Gen Genet. 1995 Sep 20;248(5):635-6.

We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a 3.5 kb segment in the recF region
of the Staphylococcus aureus chromosome. The gene order at this locus,
dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB is similar to that found in the replication origin region of 
many other bacteria. S. aureus RecF protein (predicted molecular mass 42.3 kDa), 
has 57% amino acid sequence identity with the Bacillus subtilis RecF protein
(42.2 kDa), but only 26% with the Escherichia coli RecF protein (40.5 kDa). We
have shown that the S. aureus recF gene partially complements the defect of a B. 
subtilis recF mutant, but does not complement an E. coli recF strain. The amino
acid sequence alignment of seven available RecF proteins (five of them from
bacteria of gram-negative origin) allowed us to identify eight highly conserved
regions (alpha to theta) and to predict five new conserved regions within the
gram-positive group (a to f). We suggest that the basic mechanism of homologous
recombination is conserved among free-living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00290713 
PMID: 7898435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gene. 1994 Jul 22;145(1):17-24.

An improved vector system for constructing transcriptional lacZ fusions: analysis
of regulation of the dnaA, dnaN, recF and gyrB genes of Escherichia coli.

Macián F(1), Pérez-Roger I, Armengod ME.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Citológicas, Fundación Valenciana de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Valencia, Spain.

We describe a new vector system for the in vitro construction of transcriptional 
fusions to the lacZ gene, which is expressed from the translational start signals
of galK. The galK ribosome-binding site (RBS) and its natural preceding region
ensure a constant efficiency for lacZ translation and, thus, the
beta-galactosidase (beta Gal) production of a given fusion is directly
proportional to the in vivo transcriptional activity of the inserted DNA
fragment. Single-copy lambda prophage versions of multicopy constructs can be
made by in vivo recombination. We use this system to compare the transcriptional 
activities of the promoters present in the dnaA-dnaN-recF-gyrB cluster. The order
of strength of these promoters is gyrB > dnaA > recF > dnaN. It is assumed that
gyrB belongs to the dnaA-dnaN-recF operon, because the short recF-gyrB
intercistronic region does not contain a terminator. By using this new vector
system, we have detected strong termination signals within recF that are
functional even when recF is translated at its normal rate. The low level of
transcription coming to the end of recF, and the highest activity of the gyrB
promoter, as well as results obtained with several gyrB::lacZ translational
fusions, support the conclusion that gyrB is predominantly expressed from its own
promoter under standard growth conditions. Finally, we have found that
transcription from the dnaA promoters is constant at different growth rates. This
supports the idea that autoregulation of the dnaA gene is responsible for the
coupling of the DnaA protein synthesis to cell mass increase, and accumulation of
DnaA protein governs the initiation of chromosome replication.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90317-4 
PMID: 8045420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((bglG) AND (bglB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Jan;314(2):147-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

Characterization of a new β-glucosidase/β-xylosidase from the gut microbiota of
the termite (Reticulitermes santonensis).

Mattéotti C(1), Haubruge E, Thonart P, Francis F, De Pauw E, Portetelle D,
Vandenbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Animale et Microbienne, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Université
de Liège, Gembloux, Belgium. christel.matteotti@ulg.ac.be

The gut of the termite Reticulitermes santonensis contains an interesting
diversity of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms not found elsewhere. These
microorganisms produce many enzyme-digesting lignocellulosic compounds, probably 
in cooperation with endogenous enzymes. Regarding cellulose and hemicellulose
digestion in the termite gut, much remains to be learned about the relative
contributions of termite enzymes and enzymes produced by different
microorganisms. Here we grew bacterial colonies from termite gut suspensions,
identifying 11 of them after PCR amplification of their 16S rRNA genes. After
constructing in Escherichia coli a genomic DNA library corresponding to all of
the colonies obtained, we performed functional screening for α-amylase, xylanase,
β-glucosidase, and endoglucanase activities. This screen revealed a clone
producing β-glucosidase activity. Sequence analysis showed that the cloned
genomic DNA fragment contained three complete ORFs (bglG, bglF, and bglB)
organized in a putative bgl operon. The new β-glucosidase (BglB), identified with
its regulators BglG and BglF, belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 1. The new
β-glucosidase was expressed in E. coli and purified by affinity chromatography.
The purified enzyme shows maximal activity at pH 6.0 and 40 °C. It also displays 
β-xylosidase activity.

FEMS Microbiology Letters © 2010 Federation of European Microbiological
Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original Belgian
government works.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x 
PMID: 21114521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Jun 27;223(2):267-74.

The beta-glucoside genes of Klebsiella aerogenes: conservation and divergence in 
relation to the cryptic bgl genes of Escherichia coli.

Raghunand TR(1), Mahadevan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

The ability to metabolize aromatic beta-glucosides such as salicin and arbutin
varies among members of the Enterobacteriaceae. The ability of Escherichia coli
to degrade salicin and arbutin appears to be cryptic, subject to activation of
the bgl genes, whereas many members of the Klebsiella genus can metabolize these 
sugars. We have examined the genetic basis for beta-glucoside utilization in
Klebsiella aerogenes. The Klebsiella equivalents of bglG, bglB and bglR have been
cloned using the genome sequence database of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Nucleotide
sequencing shows that the K. aerogenes bgl genes show substantial similarities to
the E. coli counterparts. The K. aerogenes bgl genes in multiple copies can also 
complement E. coli mutants deficient in bglG encoding the antiterminator and bglB
encoding the phospho-beta-glucosidase, suggesting that they are functional
homologues. The regulatory region bglR of K. aerogenes shows a high degree of
similarity of the sequences involved in BglG-mediated regulation. Interestingly, 
the regions corresponding to the negative elements present in the E. coli
regulatory region show substantial divergence in K. aerogenes. The possible
evolutionary implications of the results are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00393-8 
PMID: 12829297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2001 May 30;199(2):241-6.

Phenotypic variability of beta-glucoside utilization and its correlation to
pathogenesis process in a few enteric bacteria.

Kharat AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. aru@teacher.com

Utilization of beta-glucosides is markedly variable in the members of the family 
Enterobacteriaceae. The results presented here provide molecular clues for
evolutionary events that resulted in the phenotypic variability seen amongst the 
members of these species. The genomic hybridization of selected
Enterobacteriaceae members with the Escherichia coli bgl and cel genes resulted
in detection of a complete homolog of the bgl and cel operons in Shigella sonnei,
a member that is evolutionarily closest to E. coli. However, the Salmonella group
of organisms have been shown to carry only a homolog of bglR and bglG regions and
the deletions of the bglF and bglB genes. Similarly, Proteus mirabilis,
Enterobacter aerogenes and a non-enteric Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa have been shown to carry a homolog of the bglR and bglG regions and
deletions of the bglF and bglB genes. The homolog of the cel operon could be
identified in S. sonnei and Salmonella groups of organisms. Possible implications
of these observations, in connection with the phenotypic variability seen in
beta-glucoside utilization amongst these members, are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2001.tb10681.x 
PMID: 11377874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Microbiology (Reading). 2000 Aug;146 ( Pt 8):2039-2049. doi:
10.1099/00221287-146-8-2039.

Analysis of the beta-glucoside utilization (bgl) genes of Shigella sonnei:
evolutionary implications for their maintenance in a cryptic state.

Kharat AS(1), Mahadevan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India1.

The pattern of expression of the genes involved in the utilization of aryl
beta-glucosides such as arbutin and salicin is different in the genus Shigella
compared to Escherichia coli. The results presented here indicate that the
homologue of the cryptic bgl operon of E. coli is conserved in Shigella sonnei
and is the primary system involved in beta-glucoside utilization in the organism.
The organization of the bgl genes in S. sonnei is similar to that of E. coli;
however there are three major differences in terms of their pattern of
expression. (i) The bglB gene, encoding phospho-beta-glucosidase B, is
insertionally inactivated in S. sonnei. As a result, mutational activation of the
silent bgl promoter confers an Arbutin-positive (Arb(+)) phenotype to the cells
in a single step; however, acquiring a Salicin-positive (Sal(+)) phenotype
requires the reversion or suppression of the bglB mutation in addition. (ii)
Unlike in E. coli, a majority of the activating mutations (conferring the Arb(+) 
phenotype) map within the unlinked hns locus, whereas activation of the E. coli
bgl operon under the same conditions is predominantly due to insertions within
the bglR locus. (iii) Although the bgl promoter is silent in the wild-type strain
of S. sonnei (as in the case of E. coli), transcriptional and functional analyses
indicated a higher basal level of transcription of the downstream genes. This was
correlated with a 1 bp deletion within the putative Rho-independent terminator
present in the leader sequence preceding the homologue of the bglG gene. The
possible evolutionary implications of these differences for the maintenance of
the genes in the cryptic state are discussed.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-146-8-2039 
PMID: 10931908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((bglG) AND (bglF)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Jan;314(2):147-57. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

Characterization of a new β-glucosidase/β-xylosidase from the gut microbiota of
the termite (Reticulitermes santonensis).

Mattéotti C(1), Haubruge E, Thonart P, Francis F, De Pauw E, Portetelle D,
Vandenbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Animale et Microbienne, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Université
de Liège, Gembloux, Belgium. christel.matteotti@ulg.ac.be

The gut of the termite Reticulitermes santonensis contains an interesting
diversity of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms not found elsewhere. These
microorganisms produce many enzyme-digesting lignocellulosic compounds, probably 
in cooperation with endogenous enzymes. Regarding cellulose and hemicellulose
digestion in the termite gut, much remains to be learned about the relative
contributions of termite enzymes and enzymes produced by different
microorganisms. Here we grew bacterial colonies from termite gut suspensions,
identifying 11 of them after PCR amplification of their 16S rRNA genes. After
constructing in Escherichia coli a genomic DNA library corresponding to all of
the colonies obtained, we performed functional screening for α-amylase, xylanase,
β-glucosidase, and endoglucanase activities. This screen revealed a clone
producing β-glucosidase activity. Sequence analysis showed that the cloned
genomic DNA fragment contained three complete ORFs (bglG, bglF, and bglB)
organized in a putative bgl operon. The new β-glucosidase (BglB), identified with
its regulators BglG and BglF, belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 1. The new
β-glucosidase was expressed in E. coli and purified by affinity chromatography.
The purified enzyme shows maximal activity at pH 6.0 and 40 °C. It also displays 
β-xylosidase activity.

FEMS Microbiology Letters © 2010 Federation of European Microbiological
Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original Belgian
government works.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02161.x 
PMID: 21114521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. EMBO J. 2010 Nov 3;29(21):3630-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.240. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Spatial and temporal organization of the E. coli PTS components.

Lopian L(1), Elisha Y, Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew
University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.

The phosphotransferase system (PTS) controls preferential use of sugars in
bacteria. It comprises of two general proteins, enzyme I (EI) and HPr, and
various sugar-specific permeases. Using fluorescence microscopy, we show here
that EI and HPr localize near the Escherichia coli cell poles. Polar localization
of each protein occurs independently, but HPr is released from the poles in an
EI- and sugar-dependent manner. Conversely, the β-glucoside-specific permease,
BglF, localizes to the cell membrane. EI, HPr and BglF control the β-glucoside
utilization (bgl) operon by modulating the activity of the BglG transcription
factor; BglF inactivates BglG by membrane sequestration and phosphorylation,
whereas EI and HPr activate it by an unknown mechanism in response to
β-glucosides availability. Using biochemical, genetic and imaging methodologies, 
we show that EI and HPr interact with BglG and affect its subcellular
localization in a phosphorylation-independent manner. Upon sugar stimulation,
BglG migrates from the cell periphery to the cytoplasm through the poles. Hence, 
the PTS components appear to control bgl operon expression by ushering BglG
between the cellular compartments. Our results reinforce the notion that signal
transduction in bacteria involves dynamic localization of proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.240 
PMCID: PMC2982763
PMID: 20924357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13523-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902559106. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Modulation of transcription antitermination in the bgl operon of Escherichia coli
by the PTS.

Raveh H(1), Lopian L, Nussbaum-Shochat A, Wright A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, PO Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

BglG, which regulates expression of the beta-glucoside utilization (bgl) operon
in Escherichia coli, represents a family of RNA-binding transcriptional
antiterminators that positively regulate transcription of sugar utilization genes
in Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms. BglG is negatively regulated by the
beta-glucoside phosphotransferase, BglF, by means of phosphorylation and physical
association, and it is positively regulated by the general phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphotransferase system (PTS) proteins, enzyme I (EI) and HPr. We studied the
positive regulation of BglG both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we show that
although EI and HPr are essential for BglG activity, this mode of activation does
not require phosphorylation of BglG by HPr, as opposed to the
phosphorylation-mediated activation of many BglG-like antiterminators in
Gram-positive organisms. The effect of EI and HPr on BglG is not mediated by
BglF. Nevertheless, the release of BglG from BglF, which is stimulated by the
extracellular sugar in a sugar uptake-independent manner, is a prerequisite for
BglG activation. Taken together, the results indicate that activation of BglG is 
a 2-stage process: a sugar-stimulated release from the membrane-bound sugar
sensor followed by a phosphorylation-independent stimulatory effect exerted by
the general PTS proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0902559106 
PMCID: PMC2726385
PMID: 19633194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2007 Dec;189(23):8601-15. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Genetic dissection of the divergent activities of the multifunctional membrane
sensor BglF.

Monderer-Rothkoff G(1), Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University Medical School, P.O.
Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

BglF catalyzes beta-glucoside phosphotransfer across the cytoplasmic membrane in 
Escherichia coli. In addition, BglF acts as a sugar sensor that controls
expression of beta-glucoside utilization genes by reversibly phosphorylating the 
transcriptional antiterminator BglG. Thus, BglF can exist in two opposed states: 
a nonstimulated state that inactivates BglG by phosphorylation and a
sugar-stimulated state that activates BglG by dephosphorylation and
phosphorylates the incoming sugar. Sugar phosphorylation and BglG
(de)phosphorylation are both catalyzed by the same residue, Cys24. To investigate
the coordination and the structural requirements of the opposing activities of
BglF, we conducted a genetic screen that led to the isolation of mutations that
shift the balance toward BglG phosphorylation. We show that some of the mutants
that are impaired in dephosphorylation of BglG retained the ability to catalyze
the concurrent activity of sugar phosphotransfer. These mutations map to two
regions in the BglF membrane domain that, based on their predicted topology, were
suggested to be implicated in activity. Using in vivo cross-linking, we show that
a glycine in the membrane domain, whose substitution impaired the ability of BglF
to dephosphorylate BglG, is spatially close to the active-site cysteine located
in a hydrophilic domain. This residue is part of a newly identified motif
conserved among beta-glucoside permeases associated with RNA-binding
transcriptional antiterminators. The phenotype of the BglF mutants could be
suppressed by BglG mutants that were isolated by a second genetic screen. In
summary, we identified distinct sites in BglF that are involved in regulating
phosphate flow via the common active-site residue in response to environmental
cues.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01220-07 
PMCID: PMC2168942
PMID: 17905978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2005 Apr;8(2):127-34.

The bgl sensory system: a transmembrane signaling pathway controlling
transcriptional antitermination.

Amster-Choder O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P.O.Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. amster@cc.huji.ac.il

The bgl system represents a family of sensory systems composed of membrane-bound 
sugar-sensors and transcriptional antiterminators, which regulate expression of
genes involved in sugar utilization in response to the presence of the
corresponding sugar in the growth medium. The BglF sensor catalyzes different
activities depending on its stimulation state: in its non-stimulated state, it
phosphorylates the BglG transcriptional regulator, thus inactivating it; in the
presence of the stimulating sugar, it transports the sugar and phosphorylates it 
and also activates BglG by dephosphorylation, leading to bgl operon expression.
The sugar stimulates BglF by inducing a change in its membrane topology. BglG
exists in several conformations: a dimer, which is active, and compact and
non-compact monomers, which are inactive. BglF modulates the transition of BglG
from one conformation to another, depending on sugar availability. The two Bgl
proteins form a pre-complex at the membrane that dissociates upon stimulation,
enabling BglG to exert its effect on transcription.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2005.02.014 
PMID: 15802242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19306-18. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Dynamic membrane topology of the Escherichia coli beta-glucoside transporter
BglF.

Yagur-Kroll S(1), Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The Escherichia coli BglF protein, a permease of the
phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system, catalyzes transport and 
phosphorylation of beta-glucosides. In addition, BglF regulates bgl operon
expression by controlling the activity of the transcriptional regulator BglG via 
reversible phosphorylation. BglF is composed of three domains; one is
hydrophobic, which presumably forms the sugar translocation channel. We studied
the topology of this domain by Cys-replacement mutagenesis and chemical
modification by thiol reagents. Most Cys substitutions were well tolerated, as
demonstrated by the ability of the mutant proteins to catalyze BglF activities.
Our results suggest that the membrane domain contains eight transmembrane helices
and an alleged cytoplasmic loop that contains two additional helices. The latter 
region forms a dynamic structure, as evidenced by the alternation of residues
near its ends between faced-in and faced-out states. We suggest that this region,
together with the two transmembrane helices encompassing it, forms the sugar
translocation channel. BglF periplasmic loops are close to the membrane, the
first being a reentrant loop. This is the first systematic topological study
carried out with an intact phosphotransferase system permease and the first
demonstration of a reentrant loop in this group of proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410896200 
PMID: 15755739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 2004 Oct;186(20):6775-81.

Modulation of monomer conformation of the BglG transcriptional antiterminator
from Escherichia coli.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Lopian L, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The BglG protein positively regulates expression of the bgl operon in Escherichia
coli by binding as a dimer to the bgl transcript and preventing premature
termination of transcription in the presence of beta-glucosides. BglG activity is
negatively controlled by BglF, the beta-glucoside phosphotransferase, which
reversibly phosphorylates BglG according to beta-glucoside availability, thus
modulating its dimeric state. BglG consists of an RNA-binding domain and two
homologous domains, PRD1 and PRD2. Based on structural studies of a BglG
homologue, the two PRDs fold similarly, and the interactions within the dimer are
PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have recently shown that the affinity between PRD1
and PRD2 of BglG is high, and a fraction of the BglG monomers folds in the cell
into a compact conformation, in which PRD1 and PRD2 are in close proximity. We
show here that both BglG forms, the compact and noncompact, bind to the active
site-containing domain of BglF, IIB(bgl), in vitro. The interaction of BglG with 
IIB(bgl) or BglF is mediated by PRD2. Both BglG forms are detected as
phosphorylated proteins after in vitro phosphorylation with IIB(bgl) and are
dephosphorylated by BglF in vitro in the presence of beta-glucosides.
Nevertheless, genetic evidence indicates that the interaction of IIB(bgl) and
BglF with the compact form is seemingly less favorable. Using in vivo
cross-linking, we show that BglF enhances folding of BglG into a compact
conformation, whereas the addition of beta-glucosides reduces the amount of this 
form. Based on these results we suggest a model for the modulation of BglG
conformation and activity by BglF.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6775-6781.2004 
PMCID: PMC522206
PMID: 15466029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):50978-84. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

A fraction of the BglG transcriptional antiterminator from Escherichia coli
exists as a compact monomer.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Expression of the bgl operon in Escherichia coli, induced by beta-glucosides, is 
positively regulated by BglG, a transcriptional antiterminator. In the presence
of inducer, BglG dimerizes and binds to the bgl transcript to prevent premature
termination of transcription. The dimeric state of BglG is determined by BglF, a 
membrane-bound enzyme II of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase 
system (PTS), which reversibly phosphorylates BglG according to beta-glucoside
availability. BglG is composed of an RNA-binding domain followed by two
homologous PTS regulation domains (PRD1 and PRD2). The predicted structure of
dimeric LicT, a BglG homologue from Bacillus subtilis, suggests that the two PRDs
adopt a similar structure and that the interactions within the dimer are
PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have shown recently that the PRD1 and PRD2 domains of
BglG can form a stable heterodimer. We report here, based on in vitro and in vivo
cross-linking experiments, that a fraction of BglG is present in the cell in a
compact form in which PRD1 and PRD2 are in close proximity. The compact form is
present mainly in the BglG monomers. Our results imply that the monomer-dimer
transition involves a conformational change. The possible role of the compact
form in preventing untimely induction of the bgl operon is discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M308085200 
PMID: 14514681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46203-9. Epub 2003 Aug 15.

Interactions between the PTS regulation domains of the BglG transcriptional
antiterminator from Escherichia coli.

Fux L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, P. O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The E. coli BglG protein inhibits transcription termination within the bgl operon
in the presence of beta-glucosides. BglG represents a family of transcriptional
antiterminators that bind to RNA sequences, which partially overlap
rho-independent terminators, and prevent termination by stabilizing an
alternative structure of the transcript. The activity of BglG is determined by
its dimeric state, which is modulated by reversible phosphorylation catalyzed by 
BglF, a PTS permease. Only the non-phosphorylated BglG dimer binds to RNA and
allows read-through of transcription. BglG is composed of three domains: an
RNA-binding domain followed by two domains, PRD1 and PRD2 (PTS regulation
domains), which are similar in their sequence and folding. Based on the
three-dimensional structure of dimeric LicT, a BglG homologue from Bacillus
subtilis, the interactions within the dimer are PRD1-PRD1 and PRD2-PRD2. We have 
shown before that PRD2 mediates homodimerization very efficiently. Using genetic 
systems and in vitro techniques that assay and characterize protein-protein
interactions, we show here that the PRD1 dimerizes very slowly, but once it does,
the homodimers are stable. These results support our model that formation of BglG
dimers initiates with PRD2 dimerization followed by zipping up of two BglG
monomers to create the active RNA-binding domain. Moreover, our results
demonstrate that PRD1 and PRD2 heterodimerize efficiently in vitro and in vivo.
The affinity among the PRDs is in the following order: PRD2-PRD2 > PRD1-PRD2 >
PRD1-PRD1. The interaction between PRD1 and PRD2 offers an explanation for the
requirement of conserved residues in PRD1 for the phosphorylation of PRD2 by
BglF.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306506200 
PMID: 12923168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 10;100(12):7099-104. Epub 2003 May 27.

The BglF sensor recruits the BglG transcription regulator to the membrane and
releases it on stimulation.

Lopian L(1), Nussbaum-Shochat A, O'Day-Kerstein K, Wright A, Amster-Choder O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The Escherichia coli BglF protein is a sugar-sensor that controls the activity of
the transcriptional antiterminator BglG by reversibly phosphorylating it,
depending on beta-glucoside availability. BglF is a membrane-bound protein,
whereas BglG is a soluble protein, and they are both present in the cell in
minute amounts. How do BglF and BglG find each other to initiate signal
transduction efficiently? Using bacterial two-hybrid systems and the Far-Western 
technique, we demonstrated unequivocally that BglG binds to BglF and to its
active site-containing domain in vivo and in vitro. Measurements by surface
plasmon resonance corroborated that the affinity between these proteins is high
enough to enable their stable binding. To visualize the subcellular localization 
of BglG, we used fluorescence microscopy. In cells lacking BglF, the BglG-GFP
fusion protein was evenly distributed throughout the cytoplasm. In contrast, in
cells producing BglF, BglG-GFP was localized to the membrane. On addition of
beta-glucoside, BglG-GFP was released from the membrane, becoming evenly
distributed throughout the cell. Using mutant proteins and genetic backgrounds
that impede phosphorylation of the Bgl proteins, we demonstrated that BglG-BglF
binding and recruitment of BglG to the membrane sensor requires phosphorylation
but does not depend on the individual phosphorylation sites of the Bgl proteins. 
We suggest a mechanism for rapid response to environmental changes by preassembly
of signaling complexes, which contain transcription regulators recruited by their
cognate sensors-kinases, under nonstimulating conditions, and release of the
regulators to the cytoplasm on stimulation. This mechanism might be applicable to
signaling cascades in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1037608100 
PMCID: PMC165836
PMID: 12771379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (ftsZ)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 5;284(23):15369-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900490200. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

Escherichia coli K-12 Suppressor-free Mutants Lacking Early Glycosyltransferases 
and Late Acyltransferases: minimal lipopolysaccharide structure and induction of 
envelope stress response.

Klein G(1), Lindner B, Brabetz W, Brade H, Raina S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Leibniz-Center for Medicine and Biosciences,
Parkallee 22, D-23845 Borstel, Germany.

To elucidate the minimal lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structure needed for the
viability of Escherichia coli, suppressor-free strains lacking either the
3-deoxy-d-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid transferase waaA gene or derivatives of the
heptosyltransferase I waaC deletion with lack of one or all late acyltransferases
(lpxL/M/P) and/or various outer membrane biogenesis factors were constructed.
Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) and waaA mutants exhibited highly attenuated growth,
whereas simultaneous deletion of waaC and surA was lethal. Analyses of LPS of
suppressor-free waaA mutants grown at 21 degrees C, besides showing accumulation 
of free lipid IV(A) precursor, also revealed the presence of its pentaacylated
and hexaacylated derivatives, indicating in vivo late acylation can occur without
Kdo. In contrast, LPS of Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) strains showed primarily
Kdo(2)-lipid IV(A), indicating that these minimal LPS structures are sufficient
to support growth of E. coli under slow-growth conditions at 21/23 degrees C.
These lipid IV(A) derivatives could be modified biosynthetically by
phosphoethanolamine, but not by 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose, indicating export
defects of such minimal LPS. DeltawaaA and Delta(waaC lpxL lpxM lpxP) exhibited
cell-division defects with a decrease in the levels of FtsZ and OMP-folding
factor PpiD. These mutations led to strong constitutive additive induction of
envelope responsive CpxR/A and sigma(E) signal transduction pathways. Delta(lpxL 
lpxM lpxP) mutant, with intact waaC, synthesized tetraacylated lipid A and
constitutively incorporated a third Kdo in growth medium inducing synthesis of
P-EtN and l-Ara4N. Overexpression of msbA restored growth of Delta(lpxL lpxM
lpxP) under fast-growing conditions, but only partially that of the Delta(waaC
lpxL lpxM lpxP) mutant. This suppression could be alleviated by overexpression of
certain mutant msbA alleles or the single-copy chromosomal MsbA-498V variant in
the vicinity of Walker-box II.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M900490200 
PMCID: PMC2708834
PMID: 19346244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jul;180(13):3486-90.

Aberrant cell division and random FtsZ ring positioning in Escherichia coli cpxA*
mutants.

Pogliano J(1), Dong JM, De Wulf P, Furlong D, Boyd D, Losick R, Pogliano K, Lin
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In Escherichia coli, certain mutations in the cpxA gene (encoding a sensor kinase
of a two-component signal transduction system) randomize the location of FtsZ
ring assembly and dramatically affect cell division. However, deletion of the
cpxRA operon, encoding the sensor kinase and its cognate regulator CpxR, has no
effect on division site biogenesis. It appears that certain mutant sensor kinases
(CpxA*) either exhibit hyperactivity on CpxR or extend their signalling activity 
to one or more noncognate response regulators involved in cell division.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.13.3486-3490.1998 
PMCID: PMC107311
PMID: 9642209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (phoA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Dec;192(23):6271-8. doi: 10.1128/JB.00855-10. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

MzrA-EnvZ interactions in the periplasm influence the EnvZ/OmpR two-component
regulon.

Gerken H(1), Misra R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-4501, 
USA.

MzrA was identified as a modulator of the EnvZ/OmpR two-component signal
transduction system. Previous evidence indicated that MzrA interacts with EnvZ
and modulates its enzymatic activities to influence OmpR phosphate (OmpR∼P)
levels. Moreover, MzrA was shown to connect the bacterial envelope stress
response systems CpxA/CpxR and σ(E) to EnvZ/OmpR to widen the defensive response 
regulatory network. In this study, experiments were carried out to establish
whether the membrane or periplasmic domain of MzrA is critical for MzrA-EnvZ
interactions and to reveal MzrA residues that play an important role in these
interactions. Data obtained from chimeric constructs, in which the transmembrane 
domain of MzrA was replaced with the unrelated transmembrane domain of NarX or
signal sequence of PhoA, showed that the transmembrane domain residues of MzrA do
not play a critical role in MzrA-EnvZ interactions. The importance of the
periplasmic domain of MzrA in MzrA-EnvZ interactions was revealed by
characterizing bifunctional, fully soluble, and periplasmically localized
MalE::MzrA chimeras. This was further corroborated through the isolation of
loss-of-function, single-amino-acid substitutions in the conserved periplasmic
domain of MzrA that interfered with MzrA-EnvZ binding in a bacterial two-hybrid
system. Together, the data suggest that the binding of MzrA to EnvZ influences
the ability of EnvZ to receive and/or respond to environmental signals in the
periplasm and modulate its biochemical output to OmpR.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00855-10 
PMCID: PMC2981204
PMID: 20889743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (phoB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mSystems. 2020 Nov 10;5(6). pii: e00980-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00980-20.

Elucidation of Regulatory Modes for Five Two-Component Systems in Escherichia
coli Reveals Novel Relationships.

Choudhary KS(#)(1), Kleinmanns JA(#)(1), Decker K(#)(1), Sastry AV(1), Gao Y(1), 
Szubin R(1), Seif Y(1), Palsson BO(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA palsson@ucsd.edu.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(#)Contributed equally

Escherichia coli uses two-component systems (TCSs) to respond to environmental
signals. TCSs affect gene expression and are parts of E. coli's global
transcriptional regulatory network (TRN). Here, we identified the regulons of
five TCSs in E. coli MG1655: BaeSR and CpxAR, which were stimulated by ethanol
stress; KdpDE and PhoRB, induced by limiting potassium and phosphate,
respectively; and ZraSR, stimulated by zinc. We analyzed RNA-seq data using
independent component analysis (ICA). ChIP-exo data were used to validate
condition-specific target gene binding sites. Based on these data, we do the
following: (i) identify the target genes for each TCS; (ii) show how the target
genes are transcribed in response to stimulus; and (iii) reveal novel
relationships between TCSs, which indicate noncognate inducers for various
response regulators, such as BaeR to iron starvation, CpxR to phosphate
limitation, and PhoB and ZraR to cell envelope stress. Our understanding of the
TRN in E. coli is thus notably expanded.IMPORTANCE E. coli is a common commensal 
microbe found in the human gut microenvironment; however, some strains cause
diseases like diarrhea, urinary tract infections, and meningitis. E. coli's
two-component systems (TCSs) modulate target gene expression, especially related 
to virulence, pathogenesis, and antimicrobial peptides, in response to
environmental stimuli. Thus, it is of utmost importance to understand the
transcriptional regulation of TCSs to infer bacterial environmental adaptation
and disease pathogenicity. Utilizing a combinatorial approach integrating RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq), independent component analysis, chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with exonuclease treatment (ChIP-exo), and data
mining, we suggest five different modes of TCS transcriptional regulation. Our
data further highlight noncognate inducers of TCSs, which emphasizes the
cross-regulatory nature of TCSs in E. coli and suggests that TCSs may have a role
beyond their cognate functionalities. In summary, these results can lead to an
understanding of the metabolic capabilities of bacteria and correctly predict
complex phenotype under diverse conditions, especially when further incorporated 
with genome-scale metabolic models.

Copyright © 2020 Choudhary et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00980-20 
PMCID: PMC7657598
PMID: 33172971 


2. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010;18(1):24-36. doi: 10.1159/000274309. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

The complexities of porin genetic regulation.

De la Cruz MA(1), Calva E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Cuernavaca, México.

Our understanding of porin regulation has revealed not only increasing complexity
in the regulatory mechanisms, but also that the porin repertoire is more
extensive than previously conceived. Initially, the OmpR response regulator was
described as the master regulator of porin genes, but many more regulators are
involved such as CpxR, PhoB, Lrp, Rob, MarA, SoxS, CadC, CRP, Fnr, ToxR, H-NS,
StpA, IHF, HU and LeuO. In addition to MicF, the first small RNA (sRNA) that was 
proposed to regulate porin expression, porins are post-transcriptionally
regulated by a variety of other sRNAs, namely, MicC, MicA, IpeX, RseX, InvR, CyaR
and RybB. Future challenges include the full integration of all the regulatory
circuitries. Whether quiescent porins are merely replacements of the major porins
or are part of novel metabolic programs has yet to be elucidated. The
comprehensive exploration of the environmental determinants that affect porin
gene expression should yield valuable new information about the functions of
these important proteins.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000274309 
PMID: 20068355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):225-31.

Identification of UvrY as the cognate response regulator for the BarA sensor
kinase in Escherichia coli.

Pernestig AK(1), Melefors O, Georgellis D.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

BarA is a membrane-associated protein that belongs to a subclass of tripartite
sensors of the two-component signal transduction system family. In this study, we
report that UvrY is the cognate response regulator for BarA of Escherichia coli. 
This conclusion is based upon homologies with analogous two-component systems and
demonstrated by both biochemical and genetic means. We show that the purified
BarA protein is able to autophosphorylate when incubated with [gamma-(32)P]ATP
but not with [alpha-(32)P]ATP or [gamma-(32)P]GTP. Phosphorylated BarA, in turn, 
acts as an efficient phosphoryl group donor to UvrY but not to the non-cognate
response regulators ArcA, PhoB, or CpxR. The specificity of the
transphosphorylation reaction is further supported by the fact that UvrY can
receive the phosphoryl group from BarA-P but not from the non-cognate tripartite 
sensor ArcB-P or ATP. In addition, genetic evidence that BarA and UvrY mediate
the same signal transduction pathway is provided by the finding that both uvrY
and barA mutant strains exhibit the same hydrogen peroxide hypersensitive
phenotype. These results provide the first biochemical evidence as well as
genetic support for a link between BarA and UvrY, suggesting that the two
proteins constitute a new two-component system for gene regulation in Escherichia
coli.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001550200 
PMID: 11022030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (acrB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 22;9(3):e0074321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00743-21. Epub
2021 Dec 15.

Reducing the Periplasmic Glutathione Content Makes Escherichia coli Resistant to 
Trimethoprim and Other Antimicrobial Drugs.

Song Y(1)(2), Zhou Z(3), Gu J(1), Yang J(4), Deng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Environmental and Health Effects of Persistent Toxic
Substances, Institute of Environment and Health, Jianghan University, Wuhan,
China.
(4)Zhengzhou Key Laboratory of Children's Infection and Immunity, Children's
Hospital Affiliated with Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Although glutathione (GSH) has been shown to influence the antimicrobial effects 
of many kinds of antibiotics, little is known about its role in relation to
trimethoprim (TMP), a widely used antifolate. In this study, several genes
related to glutathione metabolism were deleted in different Escherichia coli
strains (i.e., O157:H7 and ATCC 25922), and their effects on susceptibility to
TMP were tested. The results showed that deleting gshA, gshB, grxA, and cydD
caused TMP resistance, and deleting cydD also caused resistance to other drugs.
Meanwhile, deleting gshA, grxA, and cydD resulted in a significant decrease of
the periplasmic glutathione content. Supplementing exogenous GSH or further
deleting glutathione importer genes (gsiB and ggt) restored TMP sensitivity to
ΔcydD. Subsequently, the results of quantitative-reverse transcription PCR
experiments showed that expression levels of acrA, acrB, and tolC were
significantly upregulated in both ΔgrxA and ΔcydD. Correspondingly, deleting cydD
led to a decreased accumulation of TMP within bacterial cells, and further
deleting acrA, acrB, or tolC restored TMP sensitivity to ΔcydD. Inactivation of
CpxR and SoxS, two transcriptional factors that modulate the transcription of
acrAB-tolC, restored TMP sensitivity to ΔcydD. Furthermore, mutations of gshA,
gshB, grxA, cydC, and cydD are highly prevalent in E. coli clinical strains.
Collectively, these data suggest that reducing the periplasmic glutathione
content of E. coli leads to increased expression of acrAB-tolC with the
involvement of CpxR and SoxS, ultimately causing drug resistance. To the best of 
our knowledge, this is the first report showing a linkage between periplasmic GSH
and drug resistance in bacteria. IMPORTANCE After being used extensively for
decades, trimethoprim still remains one of the key accessible antimicrobials
recommended by the World Health Organization. A better understanding of the
mechanisms of resistance would be beneficial for the future utilization of this
drug. It has been shown that the AcrAB-TolC efflux pump is associated with
trimethoprim resistance in E. coli clinical strains. In this study, we show that 
E. coli can sense the periplasmic glutathione content with the involvement of the
CpxAR two-component system. As a result, reducing the periplasmic glutathione
content leads to increased expression of acrA, acrB, and tolC via CpxR and SoxS, 
causing resistance to antimicrobials, including trimethoprim. Meanwhile,
mutations in the genes responsible for periplasmic glutathione content
maintenance are highly prevalent in E. coli clinical isolates, indicating a
potential correlation of the periplasmic glutathione content and clinical
antimicrobial resistance, which merits further investigation.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00743-21 
PMCID: PMC8672908
PMID: 34908461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Microbiol. 2016 Apr 27;7:604. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604. eCollection
2016.

Regulation of the Two-Component Regulator CpxR on Aminoglycosides and β-lactams
Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Huang H(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan L(1), Pan Y(1), Gao Y(3), Ma C(1), Hu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University Zhengzhou,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural UniversityZhengzhou, China;
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Institute of Science and
TechnologyXinxiang, China.
(3)Animal Husbandry Bureau of Henan Province Zhengzhou, China.

The two-component signal transduction system CpxAR is especially widespread in
Gram-negative bacteria. It has been reported that CpxAR contributes to the
multidrug resistance (MDR) in Escherichia coli. CpxR is a response regulator in
the two-component CpxAR system. The aim of this study was to explore the role of 
cpxR in the MDR of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. The minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics commonly used in veterinary medicine
for strains JS (a multidrug-susceptible standard strain of S. enterica serovar
Typhimurium), JSΔcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR (*), JSΔcpxRΔacrB,
JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR, JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR (*), 9 S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
isolates (SH1-9), and SH1-9ΔcpxR were determined by the 2-fold broth
microdilution method. The relative mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW,
ompD, tolC, acrB, acrD, acrF, mdtA, marA, and soxS in strains JS, JSΔcpxR, and
JSΔcpxR/pcpxR were detected by real-time PCR. The results showed 2- to 4-fold
decreases in the MICs of amikacin (AMK), gentamycin (GEN), apramycin (APR),
neomycin (NEO), ceftriaxone (CRO), ceftiofur (CEF), and cefquinome (CEQ) for
strain JSΔcpxR, as compared to those for the parental strain JS. Likewise,
SH1-9ΔcpxR were found to have 2- to 8-fold reduction in resistance to the above
antibiotics, except for NEO, as compared to their parental strains SH1-9.
Furthermore, 2- to 4-fold further decreases in the MICs of AMK, GEN, APR, and CEF
for strain JSΔcpxRΔacrB were observed, as compared to those for strain JSΔacrB.
In addition, CpxR overproduction in strain JSΔcpxR led to significant decreases
in the mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW, ompD, tolC, acrB, marA, and
soxS, and significant increases in those of stm3031 and stm1530. Notably, after
all strains were induced simultaneously by GEN to the 15th passage at
subinhibitory concentrations, strain JSΔcpxR/pcpxR showed significant increases
in mRNA expression levels of the efflux pump acrD and mdtA genes, as compared to 
strain JSΔcpxR. Our results indicate that the two-component regulator CpxR
contributes to resistance of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium to aminoglycosides
and β-lactams by influencing the expression level of the MDR-related genes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604 
PMCID: PMC4846824
PMID: 27199934 


3. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (acrA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 22;9(3):e0074321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00743-21. Epub
2021 Dec 15.

Reducing the Periplasmic Glutathione Content Makes Escherichia coli Resistant to 
Trimethoprim and Other Antimicrobial Drugs.

Song Y(1)(2), Zhou Z(3), Gu J(1), Yang J(4), Deng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Environmental and Health Effects of Persistent Toxic
Substances, Institute of Environment and Health, Jianghan University, Wuhan,
China.
(4)Zhengzhou Key Laboratory of Children's Infection and Immunity, Children's
Hospital Affiliated with Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Although glutathione (GSH) has been shown to influence the antimicrobial effects 
of many kinds of antibiotics, little is known about its role in relation to
trimethoprim (TMP), a widely used antifolate. In this study, several genes
related to glutathione metabolism were deleted in different Escherichia coli
strains (i.e., O157:H7 and ATCC 25922), and their effects on susceptibility to
TMP were tested. The results showed that deleting gshA, gshB, grxA, and cydD
caused TMP resistance, and deleting cydD also caused resistance to other drugs.
Meanwhile, deleting gshA, grxA, and cydD resulted in a significant decrease of
the periplasmic glutathione content. Supplementing exogenous GSH or further
deleting glutathione importer genes (gsiB and ggt) restored TMP sensitivity to
ΔcydD. Subsequently, the results of quantitative-reverse transcription PCR
experiments showed that expression levels of acrA, acrB, and tolC were
significantly upregulated in both ΔgrxA and ΔcydD. Correspondingly, deleting cydD
led to a decreased accumulation of TMP within bacterial cells, and further
deleting acrA, acrB, or tolC restored TMP sensitivity to ΔcydD. Inactivation of
CpxR and SoxS, two transcriptional factors that modulate the transcription of
acrAB-tolC, restored TMP sensitivity to ΔcydD. Furthermore, mutations of gshA,
gshB, grxA, cydC, and cydD are highly prevalent in E. coli clinical strains.
Collectively, these data suggest that reducing the periplasmic glutathione
content of E. coli leads to increased expression of acrAB-tolC with the
involvement of CpxR and SoxS, ultimately causing drug resistance. To the best of 
our knowledge, this is the first report showing a linkage between periplasmic GSH
and drug resistance in bacteria. IMPORTANCE After being used extensively for
decades, trimethoprim still remains one of the key accessible antimicrobials
recommended by the World Health Organization. A better understanding of the
mechanisms of resistance would be beneficial for the future utilization of this
drug. It has been shown that the AcrAB-TolC efflux pump is associated with
trimethoprim resistance in E. coli clinical strains. In this study, we show that 
E. coli can sense the periplasmic glutathione content with the involvement of the
CpxAR two-component system. As a result, reducing the periplasmic glutathione
content leads to increased expression of acrA, acrB, and tolC via CpxR and SoxS, 
causing resistance to antimicrobials, including trimethoprim. Meanwhile,
mutations in the genes responsible for periplasmic glutathione content
maintenance are highly prevalent in E. coli clinical isolates, indicating a
potential correlation of the periplasmic glutathione content and clinical
antimicrobial resistance, which merits further investigation.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00743-21 
PMCID: PMC8672908
PMID: 34908461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Oct;52(4):576-82. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Beta-lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of 
two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli.

Hirakawa H(1), Nishino K, Yamada J, Hirata T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: In Escherichia coli, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the
basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component
signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined
whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to
beta-lactam antibiotics in E. coli.
METHODS: E. coli KAM3 (acrB), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host 
strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the
agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely baeR, cheY, cpxR,
creB, evgA, fimZ, narL, ompR, rcsB, rstA, yedW, yehT and dcuR, conferred
increased beta-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of baeR, evgA, rcsB 
and dcuR conferred high-level resistance. The baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance 
is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, acrD and
mdtABC for baeR, and yhiUV for evgA, because baeR- and evgA-mediated resistance
was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The fimZ-mediated 
cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal ampC gene, because the ampC
deletion strain did not show fimZ-mediated resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to beta-lactam 
resistance in E. coli. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal
transduction system-mediated beta-lactam resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406 
PMID: 12951338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (cusC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Apr;56(1):215-27.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli to external copper.

Yamamoto K(1), Ishihama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kinki University, Nakamachi 3327-204,
Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Transcriptional response of Escherichia coli upon exposure to external copper was
studied using DNA microarray and in vivo and in vitro transcription assays.
Transcription of three hitherto-identified copper-responsive genes, copA (copper 
efflux transporter), cueO (multicopper oxidase) and cusC (tripartite copper pump 
component) became maximum at 5 min after addition of copper sulphate, and
thereafter decreased to the preshift levels within 30 min. Microarray analysis at
5 min after addition of copper indicated that a total of at least 29 genes
including these three known genes were markedly and specifically affected (28
upregulated and one downregulated). Transcription of the divergent operons,
cusCFB and cusRS, was found to be activated by CusR, which bound to a CusR box
between the cusC and cusR promoters. Except for this site, the CusR box was not
identified in the entire E. coli genome. On the other hand, transcription of copA
and cueO was found to be activated by another copper-responsive factor CueR,
which bound to a conserved inverted repeat sequence, CueR box. A total of 197
CueR boxes were identified on the E. coli genome, including the CueR box
associated with the moa operon for molybdenum cofactor synthesis. At least 10
copper-induced genes were found to be under the control of CpxAR two-component
system, indicating that copper is one of the signals for activation of the CpxAR 
system. In addition, transcription of yedWV, a putative two-component system, was
activated by copper in CusR-dependent manner. Taken together we conclude that the
copper-responsive genes are organized into a hierarchy of the regulation network,
forming at least four regulons, i.e. CueR, CusR, CpxR and YedW regulons. These
copper-responsive regulons appear to sense and respond to different
concentrations of external copper.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04532.x 
PMID: 15773991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cpxR) AND (tar)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2014 Feb;196(3):707-15. doi: 10.1128/JB.00938-13. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Repression of flagellar genes in exponential phase by CsgD and CpxR, two crucial 
modulators of Escherichia coli biofilm formation.

Dudin O(1), Geiselmann J, Ogasawara H, Ishihama A, Lacour S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Adaptation et Pathogénie des Micro-organismes, UMR5163, Institut
Jean Roget, Domaine de la Merci, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

Escherichia coli adapts its lifestyle to the variations of environmental growth
conditions, swapping between swimming motility or biofilm formation. The
stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS is an important regulator of this switch,
since it stimulates adhesion and represses flagellar biosynthesis. By measuring
the dynamics of gene expression, we show that RpoS inhibits the transcription of 
the flagellar sigma factor, FliA, in exponential growth phase. RpoS also
partially controls the expression of CsgD and CpxR, two transcription factors
important for bacterial adhesion. We demonstrate that these two regulators
repress the transcription of fliA, flgM, and tar and that this regulation is
dependent on the growth medium. CsgD binds to the flgM and fliA promoters around 
their -10 promoter element, strongly suggesting direct repression. We show that
CsgD and CpxR also affect the expression of other known modulators of cell
motility. We propose an updated structure of the regulatory network controlling
the choice between adhesion and motility.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00938-13 
PMCID: PMC3911157
PMID: 24272779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (nagE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1991 Aug;173(15):4862-76.

The malX malY operon of Escherichia coli encodes a novel enzyme II of the
phosphotransferase system recognizing glucose and maltose and an enzyme
abolishing the endogenous induction of the maltose system.

Reidl J(1), Boos W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Federal Republic of Germany.

Mutants lacking MalK, a subunit of the binding protein-dependent
maltose-maltodextrin transport system, constitutively express the maltose genes. 
A second site mutation in malI abolishes the constitutive expression. The malI
gene (at 36 min on the linkage map) codes for a typical repressor protein that is
homologous to the Escherichia coli LacI, GalR, or CytR repressor (J. Reidl, K.
Römisch, M. Ehrmann, and W. Boos, J. Bacteriol. 171:4888-4899, 1989). We now
report that MalI regulates an adjacent and divergently oriented operon containing
malX and malY. MalX encodes a protein with a molecular weight of 56,654, and the 
deduced amino acid sequence of MalX exhibits 34.9% identity to the enzyme II of
the phosphototransferase system for glucose (ptsG) and 32.1% identity to the
enzyme II for N-acetylglucosamine (nagE). When constitutively expressed, malX can
complement a ptsG ptsM double mutant for growth on glucose. Also, a delta malE
malT(Con) strain that is unable to grow on maltose due to its maltose transport
defect becomes Mal+ after introduction of malI::Tn10 and the plasmid carrying
malX. MalX-mediated transport of glucose and maltose is likely to occur by
facilitated diffusion. We conclude that malX encodes a phosphotransferase system 
enzyme II that can recognize glucose and maltose as substrates even though these 
sugars may not represent the natural substrates of the system. The second gene in
the operon, malY, encodes a protein of 43,500 daltons. Its deduced amino acid
sequence exhibits weak homology to aminotransferase sequences. The presence of
plasmid-encoded MalX alone was sufficient for complementing growth on glucose in 
a ptsM ptsG glk mutant, and the plasmid-encoded MalY alone was sufficient to
abolish the constitutivity of the mal genes in a malK mutant. The overexpression 
of malY in a strain that is wild type with respect to the maltose genes strongly 
interferes with growth on maltose. This is not the case in a malT(Con) strain
that expresses the mal genes constitutively. We conclude that malY encodes an
enzyme that degrades the inducer of the maltose system or prevents its synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.15.4862-4876.1991 
PMCID: PMC208166
PMID: 1856179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (manY)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Dec 1;44(21):10515-10525. Epub 2016 Oct 24.

Insightful directed evolution of Escherichia coli quorum sensing promoter region 
of the lsrACDBFG operon: a tool for synthetic biology systems and protein
expression.

Hauk P(1)(2), Stephens K(1)(2), Mckay R(1)(2), Virgile CR(1)(2), Ueda H(3),
Ostermeier M(4), Ryu KS(5), Sintim HO(6), Bentley WE(7)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)Fischell Department of Bioengineering, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742,
USA.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins
University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
(5)Protein Structure Group, Korea Basic Science Institute, 162 Yeongudangi-Ro,
Ochang-Eup, Cheongju-Si, Chungcheongbuk-Do 363-883, South Korea.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.
(7)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, College Park, MD, USA
bentley@umd.edu.

Quorum sensing (QS) regulates many natural phenotypes (e.q. virulence, biofilm
formation, antibiotic resistance), and its components, when incorporated into
synthetic genetic circuits, enable user-directed phenotypes. We created a library
of Escherichia coli lsr operon promoters using error-prone PCR (ePCR) and
selected for promoters that provided E. coli with higher tetracycline resistance 
over the native promoter when placed upstream of the tet(C) gene. Among the
fourteen clones identified, we found several mutations in the binding sites of QS
repressor, LsrR. Using site-directed mutagenesis we restored all p-lsrR-box sites
to the native sequence in order to maintain LsrR repression of the promoter,
preserving the other mutations for analysis. Two promoter variants, EP01rec and
EP14rec, were discovered exhibiting enhanced protein expression. In turn, these
variants retained their ability to exhibit the LsrR-mediated QS switching
activity. Their sequences suggest regulatory linkage between CytR (CRP repressor)
and LsrR. These promoters improve upon the native system and exhibit advantages
over synthetic QS promoters previously reported. Incorporation of these promoters
will facilitate future applications of QS-regulation in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw981 
PMCID: PMC5137460
PMID: 27915294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Sigma E regulators control hemolytic activity and virulence in a shrimp
pathogenic Vibrio harveyi.

Rattanama P(1), Thompson JR, Kongkerd N, Srinitiwarawong K, Vuddhakul V,
Mekalanos JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/de7188a8-1565-41fa-bc0c-418ea1bf8f44.

Members of the genus Vibrio are important marine and aquaculture pathogens.
Hemolytic activity has been identified as a virulence factor in many pathogenic
vibrios including V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. alginolyticus, V. harveyi 
and V. vulnificus. We have used transposon mutagenesis to identify genes involved
in the hemolytic activity of shrimp-pathogenic V. harveyi strain PSU3316. Out of 
1,764 mutants screened, five mutants showed reduced hemolytic activity on sheep
blood agar and exhibited virulence attenuation in shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). 
Mutants were identified by comparing transposon junction sequences to a draft of 
assembly of the PSU3316 genome. Surprisingly none of the disrupted open reading
frames or gene neighborhoods contained genes annotated as hemolysins. The gene
encoding RseB, a negative regulator of the sigma factor (σ(E)), was interrupted
in 2 out of 5 transposon mutants, in addition, the transcription factor CytR, a
threonine synthetase, and an efflux-associated cytoplasmic protein were also
identified. Knockout mutations introduced into the rpoE operon at the rseB gene
exhibited low hemolytic activity in sheep blood agar, and were 3-to 7-fold
attenuated for colonization in shrimp. Comparison of whole cell extracted
proteins in the rseB mutant (PSU4030) to the wild-type by 2-D gel electrophoresis
revealed 6 differentially expressed proteins, including two down-regulated porins
(OmpC-like and OmpN) and an upregulated protease (DegQ) which have been
associated with σ(E) in other organisms. Our study is the first report linking
hemolytic activity to the σ(E) regulators in pathogenic Vibrio species and
suggests expression of this virulence-linked phenotype is governed by multiple
regulatory pathways within the V. harveyi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032523 
PMCID: PMC3285676
PMID: 22384269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Microbiol. 1998 Jan;27(1):41-50.

DNA-binding characteristics of the Escherichia coli CytR regulator: a relaxed
spacing requirement between operator half-sites is provided by a flexible,
unstructured interdomain linker.

Jørgensen CI(1), Kallipolitis BH, Valentin-Hansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Odense University, Odense M, Denmark.

The Escherichia coli CytR regulator belongs to the LacI family of
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and prevents CRP-mediated transcription in
the CytR regulon. Unlike the other members of this protein family, CytR binds
with only modest affinity to its operators and transcription repression thus
relies on the formation of nucleoprotein complexes with the cAMP-CRP complex.
Moreover, CytR exhibits a rotational and translational flexibility in operator
binding that is unprecedented in the LacI family. In this report we examined the 
effect of changing the spacing between CytR half-operators on CytR regulation in 
vivo and on CytR binding in vitro. Maximum repression was seen with the short
spacing variants: repression peaks when the half-operators lie on the same face
of the DNA helix. Repression was retained for most spacing variants with centre
separations of half-operators < or = 3 helical turns. Our data confirm and extend
the view that CytR is a highly flexible DNA binder that can adapt many different 
conformations for co-operative binding with CRP. Furthermore, limited proteolysis
of radiolabelled CytR protein showed that the interdomain linker connecting the
DNA binding domains and the core part of CytR does not become structured upon DNA
binding. We conclude that CytR does not use hinge alpha-helices for minor groove 
recognition. Rather, CytR possesses a highly flexible interdomain linker that
allows it to form complexes with CRP at promoters with quite different
architecture.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.00655.x 
PMID: 9466254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (mtlR)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Oct;22(1):21-9.

FIS is a regulator of metabolism in Escherichia coli.

González-Gil G(1), Bringmann P, Kahmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genbiologische Forschung Berlin GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
Gardenia.Gonzalezgil@Schering.DE

The Escherichia coli DNA-binding protein FIS (factor for inversion stimulation)
stimulates site-specific recombination reactions catalysed by DNA invertases and 
is an activator of stable RNA synthesis. To address the question of whether FIS
is involved in other cellular processes we have identified and sequenced proteins
whose expression pattern is affected by FIS. This has led to the identification
of several E. coli genes whose expression in vivo is either enhanced or repressed
by FIS. All of these genes encode enzymes or transport proteins involved in the
catabolism of sugars or nucleic acids, and their expression is also dependent on 
the cAMP-CRP complex. In most cases studied the regulation by FIS is indirect and
occurs through effects on the synthesis of the respective repressor proteins. We 
conclude that FIS is a transcriptional modulator involved in the regulation of
metabolism in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1996.tb02652.x 
PMID: 8899705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (glpK)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1998 May;180(10):2782-7.

Menaquinone (vitamin K2) biosynthesis: localization and characterization of the
menA gene from Escherichia coli.

Suvarna K(1), Stevenson D, Meganathan R, Hudspeth ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb,
Illinois 60115, USA.

A key reaction in the biosynthesis of menaquinone involves the conversion of the 
soluble bicyclic naphthalenoid compound 1, 4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid (DHNA) to
the membrane-bound demethylmenaquinone. The enzyme catalyzing this reaction,
DHNA-octaprenyltransferase, attaches a 40-carbon side chain to DHNA. The menA
gene encoding this enzyme has been cloned and localized to a 2.0-kb region of the
Escherichia coli genome between cytR and glpK. DNA sequence analysis of the
cloned insert revealed a 308-codon open reading frame (ORF), which by deletion
analyses was shown to restore anaerobic growth of a menA mutant. Reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography analysis of quinones extracted from the
orf-complemented cells independently confirmed the restoration of menaquinone
biosynthesis, and similarly, analyses of isolated cell membranes for DHNA
octaprenyltransferase activity confirmed the introduction of the menA product
into the orf-complemented menA mutant. The validity of an ORF-associated putative
promoter sequence was confirmed by primer extension analyses.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.10.2782-2787.1998 
PMCID: PMC107237
PMID: 9573170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((cytR) AND (malE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1991 Aug;173(15):4862-76.

The malX malY operon of Escherichia coli encodes a novel enzyme II of the
phosphotransferase system recognizing glucose and maltose and an enzyme
abolishing the endogenous induction of the maltose system.

Reidl J(1), Boos W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Federal Republic of Germany.

Mutants lacking MalK, a subunit of the binding protein-dependent
maltose-maltodextrin transport system, constitutively express the maltose genes. 
A second site mutation in malI abolishes the constitutive expression. The malI
gene (at 36 min on the linkage map) codes for a typical repressor protein that is
homologous to the Escherichia coli LacI, GalR, or CytR repressor (J. Reidl, K.
Römisch, M. Ehrmann, and W. Boos, J. Bacteriol. 171:4888-4899, 1989). We now
report that MalI regulates an adjacent and divergently oriented operon containing
malX and malY. MalX encodes a protein with a molecular weight of 56,654, and the 
deduced amino acid sequence of MalX exhibits 34.9% identity to the enzyme II of
the phosphototransferase system for glucose (ptsG) and 32.1% identity to the
enzyme II for N-acetylglucosamine (nagE). When constitutively expressed, malX can
complement a ptsG ptsM double mutant for growth on glucose. Also, a delta malE
malT(Con) strain that is unable to grow on maltose due to its maltose transport
defect becomes Mal+ after introduction of malI::Tn10 and the plasmid carrying
malX. MalX-mediated transport of glucose and maltose is likely to occur by
facilitated diffusion. We conclude that malX encodes a phosphotransferase system 
enzyme II that can recognize glucose and maltose as substrates even though these 
sugars may not represent the natural substrates of the system. The second gene in
the operon, malY, encodes a protein of 43,500 daltons. Its deduced amino acid
sequence exhibits weak homology to aminotransferase sequences. The presence of
plasmid-encoded MalX alone was sufficient for complementing growth on glucose in 
a ptsM ptsG glk mutant, and the plasmid-encoded MalY alone was sufficient to
abolish the constitutivity of the mal genes in a malK mutant. The overexpression 
of malY in a strain that is wild type with respect to the maltose genes strongly 
interferes with growth on maltose. This is not the case in a malT(Con) strain
that expresses the mal genes constitutively. We conclude that malY encodes an
enzyme that degrades the inducer of the maltose system or prevents its synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.15.4862-4876.1991 
PMCID: PMC208166
PMID: 1856179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rplJ) AND (rplL)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jul 7;45(12):7285-7298. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx454.

Genome-wide mRNA processing in methanogenic archaea reveals post-transcriptional 
regulation of ribosomal protein synthesis.

Qi L(1)(2), Yue L(1)(2), Feng D(1), Qi F(3), Li J(1), Dong X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing
100101, PR China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Shijingshan
District, Beijing 100049, PR China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Unlike stable RNAs that require processing for maturation, prokaryotic cellular
mRNAs generally follow an 'all-or-none' pattern. Herein, we used a 5΄
monophosphate transcript sequencing (5΄P-seq) that specifically captured the
5΄-end of processed transcripts and mapped the genome-wide RNA processing sites
(PSSs) in a methanogenic archaeon. Following statistical analysis and stringent
filtration, we identified 1429 PSSs, among which 23.5% and 5.4% were located in
5΄ untranslated region (uPSS) and intergenic region (iPSS), respectively. A
predominant uridine downstream PSSs served as a processing signature. Remarkably,
5΄P-seq detected overrepresented uPSS and iPSS in the polycistronic operons
encoding ribosomal proteins, and the majority upstream and proximal ribosome
binding sites, suggesting a regulatory role of processing on translation
initiation. The processed transcripts showed increased stability and translation 
efficiency. Particularly, processing within the tricistronic transcript of
rplA-rplJ-rplL enhanced the translation of rplL, which can provide a driving
force for the 1:4 stoichiometry of L10 to L12 in the ribosome. Growth-associated 
mRNA processing intensities were also correlated with the cellular ribosomal
protein levels, thereby suggesting that mRNA processing is involved in tuning
growth-dependent ribosome synthesis. In conclusion, our findings suggest that
mRNA processing-mediated post-transcriptional regulation is a potential mechanism
of ribosomal protein synthesis and stoichiometry.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx454 
PMCID: PMC5499594
PMID: 28520982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 14;5(7):e11575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575.

Measurement of the rates of synthesis of three components of ribosomes of
Mycobacterium fortuitum: a theoretical approach to qRT-PCR experimentation.

Garcia MJ(1), Nuñez MC, Cox RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Preventiva, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Autónoma, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Except for the ribosomal protein L12 (rplL), ribosomal proteins are
present as one copy per ribosome; L12 (rplL) is unusual because it is present as 
four copies per ribosome. Thus, the strategies used by Mycobacterium fortuitum to
regulate ribosomal protein synthesis were investigated, including evaluations of 
the rates of chain elongations of 16S rRNA, rplL and ribosomal protein S12
(rpsL).
METHODOLOGY: RNA was isolated from cell cultures and cDNA was prepared. The
numbers of cDNA copies of 16S rRNA, precursor-16S rRNA and transcripts of rpsL
and rplL were quantified by qRT-PCR and then related to the rates of 16S rRNA,
rpsL and rplL chain elongations by means of a mathematical framework for coupled 
transcription/translation.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The rates of synthesis of 16S rRNA, rpsL and rplL
respectively were found to be approximately 50 x 10(3) nucleotides h(-1), 1.6 x
10(3) amino acid residues h(-1) and 3.4 x 10(3) amino acid residues h(-1). The
number of transcripts of rplL was approximately twice that of rpsL. These data
account for the presence of one copy of rpsL and four copies of rplL per
ribosome, and reveal that the rate of M. fortuitum ribosome synthesis was closer 
to that of M. tuberculosis than to E. coli. Except for rplJ, the elongation rate 
obtained for rpsL was inferred to be appropriate for all other proteins present
as one copy per ribosome.
SIGNIFICANCE: The results obtained provide the basis for a comprehensive view of 
the kinetics of ribosome synthesis, and of the ways that bacterial cells utilize 
genes encoding ribosomal proteins. The methodology also applies to proteins
involved in transcription, energy generation and to bacterial proteins in
general. The method proposed for measuring the fidelity of cDNA preparations is
intrinsically much more sensitive than procedures that measure the integrity of
16S rRNA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011575 
PMCID: PMC2904383
PMID: 20644643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Jan 26;1517(2):243-9.

Identification of a growth phase-dependent promoter in the rplJL operon of
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2).

Blanco G(1), Sánchez C, Rodicio MR, Méndez C, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo,
Spain.

A single promoter, rplJp (P(L10)), has been identified in the rplJL operon from
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) by promoter probe and primer extension analyses.
P(L10) is located upstream of the rplL gene and of the DNA encoding the mRNA
leader region that contains the putative L10 (or L10.L12(4)) binding site for
translational autogenous regulation. The potential start point for transcription 
was found 239 nucleotides upstream of the predicted translational start codon of 
rplJ. The promoter sequence shows -35 and -10 hexamers that resemble those of
Streptomyces consensus Escherichia coli sigma(70)-like promoters and the rplJp
from Streptomyces griseus. The amount of the transcript detected by primer
extension analysis decreases during growth immediately after the transition
phase, a slowdown in growth occurring during exponential phase associated with
increases in ppGpp level. The temporal pattern of transcripts shows a clear
correlation with the temporal pattern of L10 and L7/L12 protein synthesis
reported in previous kinetic studies. This indicates that P(L10) is a growth
phase-dependent promoter which may contribute, together with translational
regulation, to the decrease in the synthesis of L10 and L7/L12 observed in liquid
minimal medium. This is supported by results of promoter probe experiments.
Although no significant promoter activity has been found by promoter probing in
the rplJ and rplL intergenic region, an additional 5'-transcript end was detected
by primer extension, probably as a result of mRNA processing event from a longer 
transcript. This may be required to maintain the 1:4 ratio observed for L10 and
L7/L12 in the ribosomes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(00)00280-3 
PMID: 11342105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1997 Feb 28;186(2):227-35.

Molecular cloning and characterization of Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB.

Alekshun M(1), Kashlev M, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla 10595, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi rpoB, the gene encoding the beta-subunit of RNA polymerase, 
has been cloned and sequenced. The full-length gene encodes a protein of 1154
amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 129.8 kDa. The amino-acid
sequence is 49% identical to the corresponding protein from Escherichia coli. B. 
burgdorferi rpoB is a component of a gene cluster, which includes rplJ, rplL and 
rpoC. A temperature-sensitive E. coli rpoB mutant could be complemented by
introduction of the B. burgdorferi gene, indicating that the B. burgdorferi rpoB 
is expressed in E. coli and the beta-subunit can be assembled into functional
holoenzyme. The wild-type amino-acid sequence of the B. burgdorferi beta-subunit 
is consistent with those of spontaneously arising rifampicin-resistant mutants of
E. coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis at certain critical residues. This
suggests that the natural resistance of B. burgdorferi to rifampicin may be due
to the primary amino-acid sequence of its beta-subunit.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00714-7 
PMID: 9074501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Microbiol. 1994 May;12(3):375-85.

Synthesis of ribosomal proteins during growth of Streptomyces coelicolor.

Blanco G(1), Rodicio MR, Puglia AM, Méndez C, Thompson CJ, Salas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, Spain.

Changes in expression of ribosomal protein genes during growth and stationary
phase of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) in liquid medium were studied. Proteins
being synthesized were pulse-labelled with [35S]-methionine, separated by
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and quantified using the
BioImage computer software. Most of the ribosomal proteins were synthesized
throughout the life cycle. Exceptions were two proteins whose synthesis
drastically decreased at the approach of stationary phase. These two proteins
were identified in purified ribosomes as homologues of Escherichia coli ribosomal
proteins L10 and L7/L12, using antibodies raised against fusion proteins between 
these ribosomal proteins and Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase. The genes (rplJ
and rplL) encoding the L10 and L7/L12 proteins were contained in a 1.2 kb BamHI
fragment that was cloned and sequenced. The linkage and order of the genes
coincide with other L10-L7/L12 operons. However, L11 and L1 genes were not
present immediately upstream of the L10 gene, as is the case for E. coli and
other bacteria. Instead, two open reading frames of unknown function were found
immediately upstream of the L10 gene, in an adjacent 1.9 kb BamHI fragment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1994.tb01027.x 
PMID: 7545948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Gene. 1994 Mar 11;140(1):137-8.

Sequences of the rplJL operon containing the L10 and L7/L12 genes from Brucella
abortus.

Oliveira SC(1), Zhu Y, Splitter G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison 53706.

The rplJL operon encodes the L10 and L7/L12 proteins, essential for ribosomal
function and protein synthesis. In this study, we report the nucleotide sequence 
of the rplJ and rplL genes from Brucella abortus. The deduced amino-acid
sequences show 37 and 67% identity to Escherichia coli L10 and L7/L12,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90744-7 
PMID: 8125331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1990 Jan;172(1):431-6.

Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L10 is rapidly degraded when synthesized in
excess of ribosomal protein L7/L12.

Petersen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

In Escherichia coli the genes encoding ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/12, rplJ and
rplL, respectively, are cotranscribed and subject to translational coupling.
Synthesis of both proteins is coordinately regulated at the translational level
by binding of L10 or a complex of L10 and L7/L12 to a single target in the mRNA
leader region upstream of rplJ. Unexpectedly, small deletions that inactivated
the ribosome-binding site of the rplL gene carried on multicopy plasmids exerted 
a negative effect on expression of the upstream rplJ gene. This effect could be
overcome by overproduction of L7/L12 in trans from another plasmid. This apparent
stimulation resulted from stabilization of the overproduced L10 protein by
L7/L12, presumably because free L10, in contrast to L10 complexed with L7/L12, is
subject to rapid proteolytic decay. The contribution of this decay mechanism to
the regulation of the rplJL operon is evaluated.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.1.431-436.1990 
PMCID: PMC208449
PMID: 2403546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Biol. 1989 Mar 20;206(2):323-32.

Long-range translational coupling in the rplJL-rpoBC operon of Escherichia coli.

Petersen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

In Escherichia coli the genes encoding ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/L12, rplJ
and rplL, are cotranscribed, and translation of both cistrons is regulated by
binding of L10 or a complex of L10 and L7/L12 to a single target in the mRNA
leader region. Co-ordinated regulation is assured by some kind of translational
coupling, the mechanism of which was investigated here by deletion analysis of
plasmids carrying either the intact rplL gene or rplL-lacZ gene fusions. Unless
the rplL ribosome binding site was modified by deletion, efficient initiation of 
translation required translation of a region located more than 500 nucleotides
upstream on the transcript within the rplJ cistron. It is proposed that the
wild-type rplL ribosome binding site is blocked by long-range RNA base-pairing to
this region, when translation of the rplJ sequence is inhibited.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90482-8 
PMID: 2654402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 1984 Aug;159(2):770-2.

Order of ribosomal protein genes in the Rif cluster of Bacillus subtilis is
identical to that of Escherichia coli.

Dabbs ER.

Mutants of Bacillus subtilis with electrophoretic variants of ribosomal protein
L1, L5, L9, or L11 were used to determine the order of the genes for these
proteins by transformation experiments. The proteins are homologous with
Escherichia coli proteins L1, L10, L12, and L11, respectively; using the gene
locus designations based on this correspondence, we determined the order of the
loci to be cysA-rplK-rplA-rplJ-rplL-rpoB. The order of the last five loci was
identical to that of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.159.2.770-772.1984 
PMCID: PMC215713
PMID: 6430876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bacteriol. 1984 Apr;158(1):279-85.

Relative activities of the transcriptional regulatory sites in the rplKAJLrpoBC
gene cluster of Escherichia coli.

Ralling G, Linn T.

The pattern of transcription of the rplKAJLrpoBC gene cluster of Escherichia coli
appears to be complex. At least four different promoters and a transcriptional
attenuator have been identified. To compare the relative effect of each of the
putative promoters and the attenuator on transcription of these genes, we fused
these regulatory sites to lacZ. These transcriptional fusions were constructed on
lambda transducing phages so a single copy of each could be stably integrated
into the chromosome. The level of beta-galactosidase in a lysogen of each phage
reflects the activity of the transcriptional regulatory site. We find that the
promoters preceding rplK (rplKp) and rplJ (rplJp) are indeed the major promoters 
of this gene cluster. The minor promoter before rplL (rplLp) is much weaker and
contributes little to the transcription of the downstream genes. Under these
conditions, we find no evidence of a promoter (rpoBp) in the rplL-rpoB
intercistronic region. The attenuator (atn) terminates ca. 70% of the transcripts
initiated at the promoters preceding it. Although we cannot rule out that some
transcripts from rplKp may read through into rplJLrpoBC, we find that rplJp alone
is sufficient for high-level expression of these genes.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.158.1.279-285.1984 
PMCID: PMC215409
PMID: 6325390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((rsd) AND (sdiA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mSystems. 2018 Sep 11;3(5). pii: e00057-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18.
eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Coordinated Hibernation of Transcriptional and Translational Apparatus during
Growth Transition of Escherichia coli to Stationary Phase.

Yoshida H(1), Shimada T(2), Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the process of Escherichia coli K-12 growth from exponential phase to
stationary, marked alteration takes place in the pattern of overall genome
expression through modulation of both parts of the transcriptional and
translational apparatus. In transcription, the sigma subunit with promoter
recognition properties is replaced from the growth-related factor RpoD by the
stationary-phase-specific factor RpoS. The unused RpoD is stored by binding with 
the anti-sigma factor Rsd. In translation, the functional 70S ribosome is
converted to inactive 100S dimers through binding with the ribosome modulation
factor (RMF). Up to the present time, the regulatory mechanisms of expression of 
these two critical proteins, Rsd and RMF, have remained totally unsolved. In this
study, attempts were made to identify the whole set of transcription factors
involved in transcription regulation of the rsd and rmf genes using the newly
developed promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) screening system. In the
first screening, 74 candidate TFs with binding activity to both of the rsd and
rmf promoters were selected from a total of 194 purified TFs. After 6 cycles of
screening, we selected 5 stress response TFs, ArcA, McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA,
for detailed analysis in vitro and in vivo of their regulatory roles. Results
indicated that both rsd and rmf promoters are repressed by ArcA and activated by 
McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA. We propose the involvement of a number of TFs in
simultaneous and coordinated regulation of the transcriptional and translational 
apparatus. By using genomic SELEX (gSELEX) screening, each of the five TFs was
found to regulate not only the rsd and rmf genes but also a variety of genes for 
growth and survival. IMPORTANCE During the growth transition of E. coli from
exponential phase to stationary, the genome expression pattern is altered
markedly. For this alteration, the transcription apparatus is altered by binding 
of anti-sigma factor Rsd to the RpoD sigma factor for sigma factor replacement,
while the translation machinery is modulated by binding of RMF to 70S ribosome to
form inactive ribosome dimer. Using the PS-TF screening system, a number of TFs
were found to bind to both the rsd and rmf promoters, of which the regulatory
roles of 5 representative TFs (one repressor ArcA and the four activators McbR,
RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA) were analyzed in detail. The results altogether indicated
the involvement of a common set of TFs, each sensing a specific environmental
condition, in coordinated hibernation of the transcriptional and translational
apparatus for adaptation and survival under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18 
PMCID: PMC6134199
PMID: 30225374 


############# ((rsd) AND (rpoD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Front Genet. 2019 Dec 4;10:1153. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153. eCollection 2019.

Coordinated Regulation of Rsd and RMF for Simultaneous Hibernation of
Transcription Apparatus and Translation Machinery in Stationary-Phase Escherichia
coli.

Yoshida H(1), Wada A(2), Shimada T(3)(4), Maki Y(1), Ishihama A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan.
(2)Yoshida Biological Laboratory, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kawasaki, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Japan.

Transcription and translation in growing phase of Escherichia coli, the
best-studied model prokaryote, are coupled and regulated in coordinate fashion.
Accordingly, the growth rate-dependent control of the synthesis of RNA polymerase
(RNAP) core enzyme (the core component of transcription apparatus) and ribosomes 
(the core component of translation machinery) is tightly coordinated to keep the 
relative level of transcription apparatus and translation machinery constant for 
effective and efficient utilization of resources and energy. Upon entry into the 
stationary phase, transcription apparatus is modulated by replacing RNAP
core-associated sigma (promoter recognition subunit) from growth-related RpoD to 
stationary-phase-specific RpoS. The anti-sigma factor Rsd participates for the
efficient replacement of sigma, and the unused RpoD is stored silent as Rsd-RpoD 
complex. On the other hand, functional 70S ribosome is transformed into inactive 
100S dimer by two regulators, ribosome modulation factor (RMF) and hibernation
promoting factor (HPF). In this review article, we overview how we found these
factors and what we know about the molecular mechanisms for silencing
transcription apparatus and translation machinery by these factors. In addition, 
we provide our recent findings of promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) 
screening of the transcription factors involved in regulation of the rsd and rmf 
genes. Results altogether indicate the coordinated regulation of Rsd and RMF for 
simultaneous hibernation of transcription apparatus and translation machinery.

Copyright © 2019 Yoshida, Wada, Shimada, Maki and Ishihama.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01153 
PMCID: PMC6904343
PMID: 31867037 


2. mSystems. 2018 Sep 11;3(5). pii: e00057-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18.
eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Coordinated Hibernation of Transcriptional and Translational Apparatus during
Growth Transition of Escherichia coli to Stationary Phase.

Yoshida H(1), Shimada T(2), Ishihama A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Meiji University, School of Agriculture, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Micro-Nano Technology, Hosei University, Koganei, Tokyo,
Japan.

In the process of Escherichia coli K-12 growth from exponential phase to
stationary, marked alteration takes place in the pattern of overall genome
expression through modulation of both parts of the transcriptional and
translational apparatus. In transcription, the sigma subunit with promoter
recognition properties is replaced from the growth-related factor RpoD by the
stationary-phase-specific factor RpoS. The unused RpoD is stored by binding with 
the anti-sigma factor Rsd. In translation, the functional 70S ribosome is
converted to inactive 100S dimers through binding with the ribosome modulation
factor (RMF). Up to the present time, the regulatory mechanisms of expression of 
these two critical proteins, Rsd and RMF, have remained totally unsolved. In this
study, attempts were made to identify the whole set of transcription factors
involved in transcription regulation of the rsd and rmf genes using the newly
developed promoter-specific transcription factor (PS-TF) screening system. In the
first screening, 74 candidate TFs with binding activity to both of the rsd and
rmf promoters were selected from a total of 194 purified TFs. After 6 cycles of
screening, we selected 5 stress response TFs, ArcA, McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA,
for detailed analysis in vitro and in vivo of their regulatory roles. Results
indicated that both rsd and rmf promoters are repressed by ArcA and activated by 
McbR, RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA. We propose the involvement of a number of TFs in
simultaneous and coordinated regulation of the transcriptional and translational 
apparatus. By using genomic SELEX (gSELEX) screening, each of the five TFs was
found to regulate not only the rsd and rmf genes but also a variety of genes for 
growth and survival. IMPORTANCE During the growth transition of E. coli from
exponential phase to stationary, the genome expression pattern is altered
markedly. For this alteration, the transcription apparatus is altered by binding 
of anti-sigma factor Rsd to the RpoD sigma factor for sigma factor replacement,
while the translation machinery is modulated by binding of RMF to 70S ribosome to
form inactive ribosome dimer. Using the PS-TF screening system, a number of TFs
were found to bind to both the rsd and rmf promoters, of which the regulatory
roles of 5 representative TFs (one repressor ArcA and the four activators McbR,
RcdA, SdiA, and SlyA) were analyzed in detail. The results altogether indicated
the involvement of a common set of TFs, each sensing a specific environmental
condition, in coordinated hibernation of the transcriptional and translational
apparatus for adaptation and survival under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00057-18 
PMCID: PMC6134199
PMID: 30225374 


3. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 22;8(8):e72329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072329. eCollection
2013.

Evidence for sigma factor competition in the regulation of alginate production by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Yin Y(1), Withers TR, Wang X, Yu HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Joan C. Edwards School of
Medicine at Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia, USA.

Alginate overproduction, or mucoidy, plays an important role in the pathogenesis 
of P. aeruginosa lung infection in cystic fibrosis (CF). Mucoid strains with mucA
mutations predominantly populate in chronically-infected patients. However, the
mucoid strains can revert to nonmucoidy in vitro through suppressor mutations. We
screened a mariner transposon library using CF149, a non-mucoid clinical isolate 
with a misssense mutation in algU (AlgU(A61V)). The wild type AlgU is a
stress-related sigma factor that activates transcription of alginate
biosynthesis. Three mucoid mutants were identified with transposon insertions
that caused 1) an overexpression of AlgU(A61V), 2) an overexpression of the
stringent starvation protein A (SspA), and 3) a reduced expression of the major
sigma factor RpoD (σ(70)). Induction of AlgU(A61V) in trans caused conversion to 
mucoidy in CF149 and PAO1DalgU, suggesting that AlgU(A61V) is functional in
activating alginate production. Furthermore, the level of AlgU(A61V) was
increased in all three mutants relative to CF149. However, compared to the wild
type AlgU, AlgU(A61V) had a reduced activity in promoting alginate production in 
PAO1ΔalgU. SspA and three other anti-σ(70) orthologues, P. aeruginosa AlgQ, E.
coli Rsd, and T4 phage AsiA, all induced mucoidy, suggesting that reducing
activity of RpoD is linked to mucoid conversion in CF149. Conversely, RpoD
overexpression resulted in suppression of mucoidy in all mucoid strains tested,
indicating that sigma factor competition can regulate mucoidy. Additionally, an
RpoD-dependent promoter (PssrA ) was more active in non-mucoid strains than in
isogenic mucoid variants. Altogether, our results indicate that the anti-σ(70)
factors can induce conversion to mucoidy in P. aeruginosa CF149 with
algU-suppressor mutation via modulation of RpoD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072329 
PMCID: PMC3750012
PMID: 23991093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Bacteriol. 2005 Aug;187(15):5097-107.

Involvement of AlgQ in transcriptional regulation of pyoverdine genes in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1.

Ambrosi C(1), Tiburzi F, Imperi F, Putignani L, Visca P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Roma Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 
Roma, Italy. visca@bio.uniroma3.it

In response to iron limitation, Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces the fluorescent
siderophore pyoverdine. Transcription of pyoverdine biosynthetic (pvd) genes is
driven by the iron starvation sigma factor PvdS, which is negatively regulated by
the Fur-Fe(II) holorepressor. We studied the effect of AlgQ, the Escherichia coli
Rsd orthologue, on pyoverdine production by P. aeruginosa PAO1. AlgQ is a global 
regulatory protein which activates alginate, ppGpp, and inorganic polyphosphate
synthesis through a cascade involving nucleoside diphosphate kinase (Ndk). AlgQ
is also capable of interacting with region 4 of RpoD. In a reconstituted E. coli 
system, PvdS-dependent transcription from the pvdA promoter was doubled by the
multicopy algQ gene. The P. aeruginosa DeltaalgQ mutant exhibited a moderate but 
reproducible reduction in pyoverdine production compared with wild-type PAO1, as 
a result of a decline in transcription of pvd genes. PvdS expression was not
affected by the algQ mutation. Single-copy algQ fully restored pyoverdine
production and expression of pvd genes in the DeltaalgQ mutant, while ndk did
not. An increased intracellular concentration of RpoD mimicked the DeltaalgQ
phenotype, whereas PvdS overexpression suppressed the algQ mutation. E. coli rsd 
could partially substitute for algQ in transcriptional modulation of pvd genes.
We propose that AlgQ acts as an anti-sigma factor for RpoD, eliciting core RNA
polymerase recruitment by PvdS and transcription initiation at pvd promoters.
AlgQ provides a link between the pyoverdine and alginate regulatory networks.
These systems have similarities in responsiveness and physiological function:
both depend on alternative sigma factors, respond to nutrient starvation, and act
as virulence determinants for P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.15.5097-5107.2005 
PMCID: PMC1196021
PMID: 16030202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Dev. 2002 May 15;16(10):1260-70.

Regulation of sigma factor competition by the alarmone ppGpp.

Jishage M(1), Kvint K, Shingler V, Nyström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology-Microbiology, Göteborg University,
405 30 Göteberg, Sweden.

Many regulons controlled by alternative sigma factors, including sigma(S) and
sigma(32), are poorly induced in cells lacking the alarmone ppGpp. We show that
ppGpp is not absolutely required for the activity of sigma(S)-dependent promoters
because underproduction of sigma(70), specific mutations in rpoD (rpoD40 and
rpoD35), or overproduction of Rsd (anti-sigma(70)) restored expression from
sigma(S)-dependent promoters in vivo in the absence of ppGpp accumulation. An in 
vitro transcription/competition assay with reconstituted RNA polymerase showed
that addition of ppGpp reduces the ability of wild-type sigma(70) to compete with
sigma(32) for core binding and the mutant sigma(70) proteins, encoded by rpoD40
and rpoD35, compete less efficiently than wild-type sigma(70). Similarly, an in
vivo competition assay showed that the ability of both sigma(32) and sigma(S) to 
compete with sigma(70) is diminished in cells lacking ppGpp. Consistently, the
fraction of sigma(S) and sigma(32) bound to core was drastically reduced in
ppGpp-deficient cells. Thus, the stringent response encompasses a mechanism that 
alters the relative competitiveness of sigma factors in accordance with cellular 
demands during physiological stress.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.227902 
PMCID: PMC186289
PMID: 12023304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (dnaE)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mutat Res. 2002 Jan 29;499(1):85-95.

Sequence analysis and phenotypes of five temperature sensitive mutator alleles of
dnaE, encoding modified alpha-catalytic subunits of Escherichia coli DNA
polymerase III holoenzyme.

Vandewiele D(1), Fernández de Henestrosa AR, Timms AR, Bridges BA, Woodgate R.

Author information: 
(1)Section on DNA Replication, Repair and Mutagenesis, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2725, USA.

In the 1970s, several thermosensitive alleles of dnaE (encoding the
alpha-catalytic subunit of pol III) were isolated. Genetic characterization of
these dnaE mutants revealed that some are mutator alleles at permissive
temperature. We have determined the nucleotide changes of five such temperature
sensitive mutator alleles (dnaE9, dnaE74, dnaE486, dnaE511, and dnaE1026) and
find that most are single missense mutations. The exception is dnaE1026 which is 
a compound allele consisting of multiple missense mutations. When the previously 
characterized mutator alleles were moved into a lexA51(Def) recA730 strain,
dnaE486, dnaE1026 and dnaE74 conferred a modest approximately two-six-fold
increase in spontaneous mutagenesis when grown at the permissive temperature of
28 degrees C, while dnaE9 and dnaE511 actually resulted in a slight decrease in
spontaneous mutagenesis. In isogenic DeltaumuDC derivatives, the level of
spontaneous mutagenesis dropped significantly, although in each case, the overall
mutator effect conferred by the dnaE allele was relatively larger, with all five 
dnaE alleles conferring an increased spontaneous mutation rate approximately
5-22-fold over the isogenic dnaE+ DeltaumuDC strain. Interestingly, the
temperature sensitivity conferred by each allele varied considerably in the
lexA51(Def) recA730 background and in many cases, this phenotype was dependent
upon the presence of functional pol V (UmuD'2C). Our data suggest that pol V can 
compete effectively with the impaired alpha-subunit for a 3' primer terminus and 
as a result, a large proportion of the phenotypic effects observed with strains
carrying missense temperature sensitive mutations in dnaE can, in fact, be
attributed to the actions of pol V rather than pol III.

DOI: 10.1016/s0027-5107(01)00268-8 
PMID: 11804607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11627-32.

A universal protein-protein interaction motif in the eubacterial DNA replication 
and repair systems.

Dalrymple BP(1), Kongsuwan K, Wijffels G, Dixon NE, Jennings PA.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Livestock
Industries, 120 Meiers Road, Indooroopilly QLD 4068, Australia.

The interaction between DNA polymerases and sliding clamp proteins confers
processivity in DNA synthesis. This interaction is critical for most DNA
replication machines from viruses and prokaryotes to higher eukaryotes. The clamp
proteins also participate in a variety of dynamic and competing protein-protein
interactions. However, clamp-protein binding sequences have not so far been
identified in the eubacteria. Here we show from three lines of evidence,
bioinformatics, yeast two-hybrid analysis, and inhibition of protein-protein
interaction by modified peptides, that variants of a pentapeptide motif
(consensus QL[SD]LF) are sufficient to enable interaction of a number of proteins
with an archetypal eubacterial sliding clamp (the beta subunit of Escherichia
coli DNA polymerase III holoenzyme). Representatives of this motif are present in
most sequenced members of the eubacterial DnaE, PolC, PolB, DinB, and UmuC
families of DNA polymerases and the MutS1 mismatch repair protein family. The
component tripeptide DLF inhibits the binding of the alpha (DnaE) subunit of E.
coli DNA polymerase III to beta at microM concentration, identifying key
residues. Comparison of the eubacterial, eukaryotic, and archaeal sliding clamp
binding motifs suggests that the basic interactions have been conserved across
the evolutionary landscape.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.191384398 
PMCID: PMC58780
PMID: 11573000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2001 Oct;183(19):5496-505.

LuxArray, a high-density, genomewide transcription analysis of Escherichia coli
using bioluminescent reporter strains.

Van Dyk TK(1), DeRose EJ, Gonye GE.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development Department, DuPont Company, Wilmington,
Delaware 19880-0173, USA. Tina.K.Van-Dyk@usa.dupont.com

A sequenced collection of plasmid-borne random fusions of Escherichia coli DNA to
a Photorhabdus luminescens luxCDABE reporter was used as a starting point to
select a set of 689 nonredundant functional gene fusions. This group, called
LuxArray 1.0, represented 27% of the predicted transcriptional units in E. coli. 
High-density printing of the LuxArray 1.0 reporter strains to membranes on agar
plates was used for simultaneous reporter gene assays of gene expression. The
cellular response to nalidixic acid perturbation was analyzed using this format. 
As expected, fusions to promoters of LexA-controlled SOS-responsive genes dinG,
dinB, uvrA, and ydjM were found to be upregulated in the presence of nalidixic
acid. In addition, six fusions to genes not previously known to be induced by
nalidixic acid were also reproducibly upregulated. The responses of two of these,
fusions to oraA and yigN, were induced in a LexA-dependent manner by both
nalidixic acid and mitomycin C, identifying these as members of the LexA regulon.
The responses of the other four were neither induced by mitomycin C nor dependent
on lexA function. Thus, the promoters of ycgH, intG, rihC, and a putative operon 
consisting of lpxA, lpxB, rnhB, and dnaE were not generally DNA damage responsive
and represent a more specific response to nalidixic acid. These results
demonstrate that cellular arrays of reporter gene fusions are an important
alternative to DNA arrays for genomewide transcriptional analyses.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.19.5496-5505.2001 
PMCID: PMC95439
PMID: 11544210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15519-24.

Efficient translesion replication in the absence of Escherichia coli Umu proteins
and 3'-5' exonuclease proofreading function.

Vandewiele D(1), Borden A, O'Grady PI, Woodgate R, Lawrence CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section on DNA Replication, Repair and Mutagenesis, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2725, USA.

Translesion replication (TR) past a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer in Escherichia
coli normally requires the UmuD'2C complex, RecA protein, and DNA polymerase III 
holoenzyme (pol III). However, we find that efficient TR can occur in the absence
of the Umu proteins if the 3'-5' exonuclease proofreading activity of the pol III
epsilon-subunit also is disabled. TR was measured in isogenic uvrA6 DeltaumuDC
strains carrying the dominant negative dnaQ allele, mutD5, or DeltadnaQ spq-2
mutations by transfecting them with single-stranded M13-based vectors containing 
a specifically located cis-syn T-T dimer. As expected, little TR was observed in 
the DeltaumuDC dnaQ+ strain. Surprisingly, 26% TR occurred in UV-irradiated
DeltaumuDC mutD5 cells, one-half the frequency found in a uvrA6 umuDC+mutD5
strain. lexA3 (Ind-) derivatives of the strains showed that this TR was
contingent on two inducible functions, one LexA-dependent, responsible for
approximately 70% of the TR, and another LexA-independent, responsible for the
remaining approximately 30%. Curiously, the DeltaumuDC DeltadnaQ spq-2 strain
exhibited only the LexA-independent level of TR. The cause of this result appears
to be the spq-2 allele, a dnaE mutation required for viability in DeltadnaQ
strains, since introduction of spq-2 into the DeltaumuDC mutD5 strain also
reduces the frequency of TR to the LexA-independent level. The molecular
mechanism responsible for the LexA-independent TR is unknown but may be related
to the UVM phenomenon [Palejwala, V. A., Wang, G. E., Murphy, H. S. & Humayun, M.
Z. (1995) J. Bacteriol. 177, 6041-6048]. LexA-dependent TR does not result from
the induction of pol II, since TR in the DeltaumuDC mutD5 strain is unchanged by 
introduction of a DeltapolB mutation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15519 
PMCID: PMC28075
PMID: 9861001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genetics. 1997 Jun;146(2):457-70.

Enhanced deletion formation by aberrant DNA replication in Escherichia coli.

Saveson CJ(1), Lovett ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254-9110,
USA.

Repeated genes and sequences are prone to genetic rearrangements including
deletions. We have investigated deletion formation in Escherichia coli strains
mutant for various replication functions. Deletion was selected between 787 base 
pair tandem repeats carried either on a ColE1-derived plasmid or on the E. coli
chromosome. Only mutations in functions associated with DNA Polymerase III
elevated deletion rates in our assays. Especially large increases were observed
in strains mutant in dnaQ the epsilon editing subunit of Pol III, and dnaB, the
replication fork helicase. Mutations in several other functions also altered
deletion formation: the alpha polymerase (dnal;), the gamma clamp loader complex 
(holC, dnaX), and the beta clamp (dnaN) subunits of Pol III and the primosomal
proteins, dnaC and priA. Aberrant replication stimulated deletions through
several pathways. Whereas the elevation in dnaB strains was mostly recA- and
lexA-dependent, that in dnaQ strains was mostly recA- and lexA-independent.
Deletion product analysis suggested that slipped mispairing, producing monomeric 
replicon products, may be preferentially increased in a dnaQ mutant and
sister-strand exchange, producing dimeric replicon products, may be elevated in
dnaE mutants. We conclude that aberrant Polymerase III replication can stimulate 
deletion events through several mechanisms of deletion and via both
recA-dependent and independent pathways.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/146.2.457 
PMCID: PMC1207988
PMID: 9177997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mutat Res. 1987 Dec;181(2):219-26.

Current understanding of UV-induced base pair substitution mutation in E. coli
with particular reference to the DNA polymerase III complex.

Bridges BA(1), Woodgate R, Ruiz-Rubio M, Sharif F, Sedgwick SG, Hübscher U.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cell Mutation Unit, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Great Britain.

UV mutagenesis in E. coli is believed to occur in two discrete steps. The second 
step involves continued DNA synthesis beyond a blocking lesion in the template
strand. This bypass step requires induced levels of umuD and umuC gene products
and activated recA protein. DNA polymerase III may be involved since a dnaE
mutator strain (believed to have defective base selection) is associated with
enhanced UV mutagenesis in conjunction with a genetic background permitting the
bypass step. In non-UV-mutable umu and lexA strains, UV mutagenesis can be
demonstrated if delayed photoreversal is given. This is interpreted as indicating
that an earlier misincorporation step can occur in such strains but the resulting
mutations do not survive because the bypass step is blocked. The misincorporation
step does not require any induced SOS gene products and can occur either at the
replication fork or during repair replication following excision of a DNA lesion.
Neither a dnaE mutator gene (leading to a defective alpha subunit of DNA
polymerase III holoenzyme) nor a mutD5 mutator gene (leading to a defective
epsilon proofreading subunit) had any effect on the misincorporation step.
Although this is consistent with DNA polymerase III holoenzyme not being involved
in the misincorporation step, other interpretations involving the inhibition of
epsilon proofreading activity by recA protein are possible. In vitro studies are 
reported in which sites of termination of synthesis by DNA polymerase III
holoenzyme on UV-irradiated M13 mp8 DNA were examined in the presence of
inhibitors of the 3'-5' proofreading exonuclease (including recA protein). No
evidence was found for incorporation of bases opposite photoproducts suggesting
that either inhibition is more complete in the cell and/or that other factors are
involved in the misincorporation step.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(87)90099-6 
PMID: 3317025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bacteriol. 1978 Nov;136(2):538-47.

Repair of cross-linked DNA and survival of Escherichia coli treated with psoralen
and light: effects of mutations influencing genetic recombination and DNA
metabolism.

Sinden RR, Cole RS.

Repair of cross-linked DNA was studied in Escherichia coli strains carrying
mutations affecting DNA metabolism. In wild-type cells, DNA strands cut during
cross-link removal were rejoined during a subsequent incubation into
high-molecular-weight molecules. This rejoining was dependent on gene products
involved in genetic recombination. A close correlation was found relating
recombination proficiency, the rate of strand rejoining, and formation of viable 
progeny after DNA cross-linking by treatment with psoralen and light. Wild-type
cells and other mutants which were Rec+ (sbcB, recL, recL sbcB, recB recC sbcA,
recB recC sbcB, xthA1, and xthA11) rejoined cut DNA strands at a rate of 0.8 +/- 
0.1 min -1 at 37 degrees C and survived 53 to 71 cross-links per chromosome.
recB, recC, recB recC, recF, or polA strains showed reduced rates of strand
rejoining and survived 4 to 13 cross-links per chromosome.
Recombination-deficient strains (recA, recB recC sbcB recF, recB recL) and lexA
failed to rejoin DNA strands after crosslink removal and were unable to form
colonies after treatments producing as few as one to two cross-links per
chromosome. Strand rejoining occurred normally in cells with mutations affecting 
DNA replication (dnaA, danB, dnaG, and dnaE) under both permissive and
nonpermissive conditions for chromosome replication. In a polA polB dnaE strain
strand rejoining occurred at 32 degree C but not at 42 degree C, indicating that 
some DNA synthesis was required for formation of intact recombinant molecules.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.136.2.538-547.1978 
PMCID: PMC218577
PMID: 361714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (sbcD)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Arch Microbiol. 2009 Feb;191(2):185-90. doi: 10.1007/s00203-008-0441-z. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

Role of single-strand DNA 3'-5' exonuclease ExoI and nuclease SbcCD in
stationary-phase mutation in Escherichia coli K-12.

Ramírez-Santos J(1), García-Mata V, Poggio S, Camarena L, Gómez-Eichelmann MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, P.O. Box
70-228, 04510 Mexico, D.F., Mexico.

In RecBCD(+) cells, a mutated single-strand DNA 3'-5' exonuclease ExoI (SbcB15)
induced an increase in stationary-phase mutation. In sbcB15 cells, as in
wild-type cells, these mutations partially required RecA, RecB, RecF, and
expression of the LexA regulon. The absence of nuclease SbcCD in sbcB15 cells
decreased stationary-phase mutation and induced an increase in the number of cell
filaments. The absence of ExoI (Deltaxon) in wild-type or sbcC cells did not
change significantly the stationary-phase mutation. Differences between the
sbcB15 and DeltaxonA cells suggest a correlation between level of SOS induction
and the generation of stationary-phase mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-008-0441-z 
PMID: 19018518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mutat Res. 1999 Dec 7;435(3):171-213.

A phylogenomic study of DNA repair genes, proteins, and processes.

Eisen JA(1), Hanawalt PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-5020, USA. jeisen@tigr.org

The ability to recognize and repair abnormal DNA structures is common to all
forms of life. Studies in a variety of species have identified an incredible
diversity of DNA repair pathways. Documenting and characterizing the similarities
and differences in repair between species has important value for understanding
the origin and evolution of repair pathways as well as for improving our
understanding of phenotypes affected by repair (e.g., mutation rates, lifespan,
tumorigenesis, survival in extreme environments). Unfortunately, while repair
processes have been studied in quite a few species, the ecological and
evolutionary diversity of such studies has been limited. Complete genome
sequences can provide potential sources of new information about repair in
different species. In this paper, we present a global comparative analysis of DNA
repair proteins and processes based upon the analysis of available complete
genome sequences. We use a new form of analysis that combines genome sequence
information and phylogenetic studies into a composite analysis we refer to as
phylogenomics. We use this phylogenomic analysis to study the evolution of repair
proteins and processes and to predict the repair phenotypes of those species for 
which we now know the complete genome sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0921-8777(99)00050-6 
PMCID: PMC3158673
PMID: 10606811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (hupB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 1991 May;173(9):2852-63.

Inhibition of cell division in hupA hupB mutant bacteria lacking HU protein.

Dri AM(1), Rouviere-Yaniv J, Moreau PL.

Author information: 
(1)Enzymologie, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France.

Escherichia coli hupA hypB double mutants that lack HU protein have severe
cellular defects in cell division, DNA folding, and DNA partitioning. Here we
show that the sfiA11 mutation, which alters the SfiA cell division inhibitor,
reduces filamentation and production of anucleate cells in AB1157 hupA hupB
strains. However, lexA3(Ind-) and sfiB(ftsZ)114 mutations, which normally
counteract the effect of the SfiA inhibitor, could not restore a normal
morphology to hupA hupB mutant bacteria. The LexA repressor, which controls the
expression of the sfiA gene, was present in hupA hupB mutant bacteria in
concentrations half of those of the parent bacteria, but this decrease was
independent of the specific cleavage of the LexA repressor by activated RecA
protein. One possibility to account for the filamentous morphology of hupA hupB
mutant bacteria is that the lack of HU protein alters the expression of specific 
genes, such as lexA and fts cell division genes.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.9.2852-2863.1991 
PMCID: PMC207866
PMID: 2019558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((lexA) AND (ruvC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2021 Mar;296(2):437-456. doi: 10.1007/s00438-020-01760-z.
Epub 2021 Jan 28.

DNA recombination and repair in Wolbachia: RecA and related proteins.

Fallon AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Minnesota, 1980 Folwell Ave, St. Paul,
MN, 55108, USA. fallo002@umn.edu.

Wolbachia is an obligate intracellular bacterium that has undergone extensive
genomic streamlining in its arthropod and nematode hosts. Because the gene
encoding the bacterial DNA recombination/repair protein RecA is not essential in 
Escherichia coli, abundant expression of this protein in a mosquito cell line
persistently infected with Wolbachia strain wStri was unexpected. However, RecA's
role in the lytic cycle of bacteriophage lambda provides an explanation for
retention of recA in strains known to encode lambda-like WO prophages. To examine
DNA recombination/repair capacities in Wolbachia, a systematic examination of
RecA and related proteins in complete or nearly complete Wolbachia genomes from
supergroups A, B, C, D, E, F, J and S was undertaken. Genes encoding proteins
including RecA, RecF, RecO, RecR, RecG and Holliday junction resolvases RuvA,
RuvB and RuvC are uniformly absent from Wolbachia in supergroup C and have
reduced representation in supergroups D and J, suggesting that recombination and 
repair activities are compromised in nematode-associated Wolbachia, relative to
strains that infect arthropods. An exception is filarial Wolbachia strain wMhie, 
assigned to supergroup F, which occurs in a nematode host from a poikilothermic
lizard. Genes encoding LexA and error-prone polymerases are absent from all
Wolbachia genomes, suggesting that the SOS functions induced by RecA-mediated
activation of LexA do not occur, despite retention of genes encoding a few
proteins that respond to LexA induction in E. coli. Three independent E. coli
accessions converge on a single Wolbachia UvrD helicase, which interacts with
mismatch repair proteins MutS and MutL, encoded in nearly all Wolbachia genomes. 
With the exception of MutL, which has been mapped to a eukaryotic association
module in Phage WO, proteins involved in recombination/repair are uniformly
represented by single protein annotations. Putative phage-encoded MutL proteins
are restricted to Wolbachia supergroups A and B and show higher amino acid
identity than chromosomally encoded MutL orthologs. This analysis underscores
differences between nematode and arthropod-associated Wolbachia and describes
aspects of DNA metabolism that potentially impact development of procedures for
transformation and genetic manipulation of Wolbachia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-020-01760-z 
PMID: 33507381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Microbiol. 2016 Nov 9;7:1809. eCollection 2016.

Comparative Genomics of DNA Recombination and Repair in Cyanobacteria:
Biotechnological Implications.

Cassier-Chauvat C(1), Veaudor T(1), Chauvat F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell, CEA, Centre Nationnal de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Universite Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay
Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France.

Cyanobacteria are fascinating photosynthetic prokaryotes that are regarded as the
ancestors of the plant chloroplast; the purveyors of oxygen and biomass for the
food chain; and promising cell factories for an environmentally friendly
production of chemicals. In colonizing most waters and soils of our planet,
cyanobacteria are inevitably challenged by environmental stresses that generate
DNA damages. Furthermore, many strains engineered for biotechnological purposes
can use DNA recombination to stop synthesizing the biotechnological product.
Hence, it is important to study DNA recombination and repair in cyanobacteria for
both basic and applied research. This review reports what is known in a few
widely studied model cyanobacteria and what can be inferred by mining the
sequenced genomes of morphologically and physiologically diverse strains. We show
that cyanobacteria possess many E. coli-like DNA recombination and repair genes, 
and possibly other genes not yet identified. E. coli-homolog genes are unevenly
distributed in cyanobacteria, in agreement with their wide genome diversity. Many
genes are extremely well conserved in cyanobacteria (mutMS, radA, recA, recFO,
recG, recN, ruvABC, ssb, and uvrABCD), even in small genomes, suggesting that
they encode the core DNA repair process. In addition to these core genes, the
marine Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus strains harbor recBCD (DNA
recombination), umuCD (mutational DNA replication), as well as the key SOS genes 
lexA (regulation of the SOS system) and sulA (postponing of cell division until
completion of DNA reparation). Hence, these strains could possess an E. coli-type
SOS system. In contrast, several cyanobacteria endowed with larger genomes lack
typical SOS genes. For examples, the two studied Gloeobacter strains lack alkB,
lexA, and sulA; and Synechococcus PCC7942 has neither lexA nor recCD.
Furthermore, the Synechocystis PCC6803 lexA product does not regulate DNA repair 
genes. Collectively, these findings indicate that not all cyanobacteria have an
E. coli-type SOS system. Also interestingly, several cyanobacteria possess
multiple copies of E. coli-like DNA repair genes, such as Acaryochloris marina
MBIC11017 (2 alkB, 3 ogt, 7 recA, 3 recD, 2 ssb, 3 umuC, 4 umuD, and 8 xerC),
Cyanothece ATCC51142 (2 lexA and 4 ruvC), and Nostoc PCC7120 (2 ssb and 3 xerC).

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01809 
PMCID: PMC5101192
PMID: 27881980 


3. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Oct;58(1):80-101.

A role for topoisomerase III in a recombination pathway alternative to RuvABC.

Lopez CR(1), Yang S, Deibler RW, Ray SA, Pennington JM, Digate RJ, Hastings PJ,
Rosenberg SM, Zechiedrich EL.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The physiological role of topoisomerase III is unclear for any organism. We show 
here that the removal of topoisomerase III in temperature sensitive topoisomerase
IV mutants in Escherichia coli results in inviability at the permissive
temperature. The removal of topoisomerase III has no effect on the accumulation
of catenated intermediates of DNA replication, even when topoisomerase IV
activity is removed. Either recQ or recA null mutations, but not helD null or
lexA3, partially rescued the synthetic lethality of the double topoisomerase
III/IV mutant, indicating a role for topoisomerase III in recombination. We find 
a bias against deleting the gene encoding topoisomerase III in ruvC53 or
DeltaruvABC backgrounds compared with the isogenic wild-type strains. The
topoisomerase III RuvC double mutants that can be constructed are five- to
10-fold more sensitive to UV irradiation and mitomycin C treatment and are
twofold less efficient in transduction efficiency than ruvC53 mutants. The
overexpression of ruvABC allows the construction of the topoisomerase III/IV
double mutant. These data are consistent with a role for topoisomerase III in
disentangling recombination intermediates as an alternative to RuvABC to maintain
the stability of the genome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04812.x 
PMID: 16164551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Biol. 2002 Jan 25;315(4):513-27.

Mistranslation induced by streptomycin provokes a RecABC/RuvABC-dependent mutator
phenotype in Escherichia coli cells.

Balashov S(1), Humayun MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ - New Jersey Medical 
School, 185 South Orange Avenue, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Translational stress-induced mutagenesis (TSM) refers to the mutator phenotype
observed in Escherichia coli cells expressing a mutant allele (mutA or mutC) of
the glycine tRNA gene glyV (or glyW). Because of an anticodon mutation,
expression of the mutA allele results in low levels of Asp-->Gly mistranslation. 
The mutA phenotype does not require lexA-regulated SOS mutagenesis functions, and
appears to be suppressed in cells defective for RecABC-dependent homologous
recombination functions. To test the hypothesis that the TSM response is mediated
by non-specific mistranslation rather than specific Asp-->Gly misreading, we
asked if streptomycin (Str), an aminoglycoside antibiotic known to promote
mistranslation, can provoke a mutator phenotype. We report that Str induces a
strong mutator phenotype in cells bearing certain alleles of rpsL, the gene
encoding S12, an essential component of the ribosomal 30 S subunit. The phenotype
is strikingly similar to that observed in mutA cells in its mutational
specificity, as well as in its requirement for RecABC-mediated homologous
recombination functions. Expression of Str-inducible mutator phenotype correlates
with mistranslation efficiency in response to Str. Thus, mistranslation in
general is able to induce the TSM response. The Str-inducible mutator phenotype
described here defines a new functional class of rpsL alleles, and raises
interesting questions on the mechanism of action of Str, and on bacterial
response to antibiotic stress.

Copyright 2002 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.5273 
PMID: 11812126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(15):4459-67.

Identification of some DNA damage-inducible genes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: 
apparent lack of correlation with LexA binding.

Brooks PC(1), Movahedzadeh F, Davis EO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mycobacterial Research, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, England.

The repair of DNA damage is expected to be particularly important to
intracellular pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and so it is of
interest to examine the response of M. tuberculosis to DNA damage. The expression
of recA, a key component in DNA repair and recombination, is induced by DNA
damage in M. tuberculosis. In this study, we have analyzed the expression
following DNA damage in M. tuberculosis of a number of other genes which are DNA 
damage inducible in Escherichia coli. While many of these genes were also induced
by DNA damage in M. tuberculosis, some were not. In addition, one gene (ruvC)
which is not induced by DNA damage in E. coli was induced in M. tuberculosis, a
result likely linked to its different transcriptional arrangement in M.
tuberculosis. We also searched the sequences upstream of the genes being studied 
for the mycobacterial SOS box (the binding site for LexA) and assessed LexA
binding to potential sites identified. LexA is the repressor protein responsible 
for regulating expression of these SOS genes in E. coli. However, two of the
genes which were DNA damage inducible in M. tuberculosis did not have
identifiable sites to which LexA bound. The absence of binding sites for LexA
upstream of these genes was confirmed by analysis of LexA binding to overlapping 
DNA fragments covering a region from 500 bp upstream of the coding sequence to
100 bp within it. Therefore, it appears most likely that an alternative mechanism
of gene regulation in response to DNA damage exists in M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.15.4459-4467.2001 
PMCID: PMC95339
PMID: 11443079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jan;182(2):463-8.

Recombination is essential for viability of an Escherichia coli dam (DNA adenine 
methyltransferase) mutant.

Marinus MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA. martin.marinus@umassmed.edu

Double mutants of Escherichia coli dam (DNA adenine methyltransferase) strains
with ruvA, ruvB, or ruvC could not be constructed, whereas dam derivatives with
recD, recF, recJ, and recR were viable. The ruv gene products are required for
Holliday junction translocation and resolution of recombination intermediates. A 
dam recG (Holliday junction translocation) mutant strain was isolated but at a
very much lower frequency than expected. The inviability of a dam lexA (Ind(-))
host was abrogated by the simultaneous presence of plasmids encoding both recA
and ruvAB. This result indicates that of more than 20 SOS genes, only recA and
ruvAB need to be derepressed to allow for dam mutant survival. The presence of
mutS or mutL mutations allowed the construction of dam lexA (Ind(-)) derivatives.
The requirement for recA, recB, recC, ruvA, ruvB, ruvC, and possibly recG gene
expression indicates that recombination is essential for viability of dam
bacteria probably to repair DNA double-strand breaks. The effect of mutS and mutL
mutations indicates that DNA mismatch repair is the ultimate source of most of
these DNA breaks. The requirement for recombination also suggests an explanation 
for the sensitivity of dam cells to certain DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.2.463-468.2000 
PMCID: PMC94297
PMID: 10629194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mutat Res. 1996 Apr 2;362(3):219-26.

The ultraviolet-sensitizing function of plasmid R391 interferes with a late step 
of postreplication repair in Escherichia coli.

Wang TC(1), de Saint Phalle B, Millman KL, Fowler RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Chang Gung College of Medicine and
Technology, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

The conjugative plasmid R391 increases the UV radiation sensitivity of wild-type,
uvrA, and lexA cells of Escherichia coli, but not recA strains. To investigate
the UV-sensitizing function of R391, we examined the effect of R391 on the repair
of DNA daughter-strand gaps and on the UV radiation sensitivities of various
repair and/or recombination-deficient mutants. The presence of R391 did not
significantly inhibit the repair of DNA daughter-strand gaps in uvrB cells. The
presence of R391 increased the UV radiation sensitivity of uvrA, uvrA recF, uvrB,
uvrB recF, uvrB recB, and uvrB ssb-113 cells to UV irradiation, but did not
significantly increase the UV radiation sensitivity of uvrA ruvA and uvrA ruvC
strains. Based on these results, we propose that the UV-sensitizing activity of
R391 acts by inhibiting or interfering with the ruvABC-mediated postsynapsis step
of recombinational repair.

DOI: 10.1016/0921-8777(95)00044-5 
PMID: 8637500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1992 Oct;2(5):683-90.

Genetic analysis of recombination in prokaryotes.

Lloyd RG(1), Sharples GJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, UK.

Bacteria provide a simple system for the genetic analysis of homologous
recombination. More than twenty genes have been identified in Escherichia coli.
The enzymatic activities associated with the products of many of these genes have
been revealed by studies with model DNA substrates. It is now possible to pair
homologous molecules in vitro and process these through defined intermediates
into mature recombinants of the types predicted by genetic crosses.

DOI: 10.1016/s0959-437x(05)80127-3 
PMID: 1458021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 1991 Dec;173(23):7711-5.

Resolution of Holliday junctions in Escherichia coli: identification of the ruvC 
gene product as a 19-kilodalton protein.

Sharples GJ(1), Lloyd RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre,
United Kingdom.

The ruvC gene of Escherichia coli specifies a nuclease that resolves Holliday
junction intermediates in genetic recombination (B. Connolly, C.A. Parsons, F.E. 
Benson, H.J. Dunderdale, G.J. Sharples, R.G. Lloyd, and S.C. West, Proc. Natl.
Acad, Sci. USA 88:6063-6067, 1991). The gene was located between aspS and the
ruvAB operon by DNA sequencing and deletion analysis of ruvC plasmids and was
shown to encode a protein of 18,747 Da. Analysis of the DNA flanking ruvC
indicated that the gene is transcribed independently of the LexA-regulated ruvAB 
operon and is not under direct SOS control. ruvC lies downstream of an open
reading frame, orf-33, for a protein which migrates during sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as a 33-kDa polypeptide. These two
genes probably form an operon. However, expression of ruvC was found to be very
poor relative to that of orf-33. A double ribosomal frameshift between these
genes is proposed as a possible reason for the low level of RuvC. Two further
open reading frames of unknown function were identified, one on either side of
the orf-33-ruvC operon.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.23.7711-7715.1991 
PMCID: PMC212543
PMID: 1657895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((soxS) AND (mdlB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. mBio. 2014 Nov 4;5(6):e01932. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01932-14.

Improving microbial biogasoline production in Escherichia coli using tolerance
engineering.

Foo JL, Jensen HM, Dahl RH(1), George K, Keasling JD, Lee TS, Leong S,
Mukhopadhyay A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering and Department of
Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA.
(2)amukhopadhyay@lbl.gov.

Engineering microbial hosts for the production of fungible fuels requires
mitigation of limitations posed on the production capacity. One such limitation
arises from the inherent toxicity of solvent-like biofuel compounds to production
strains, such as Escherichia coli. Here we show the importance of host
engineering for the production of short-chain alcohols by studying the
overexpression of genes upregulated in response to exogenous isopentenol. Using
systems biology data, we selected 40 genes that were upregulated following
isopentenol exposure and subsequently overexpressed them in E. coli.
Overexpression of several of these candidates improved tolerance to exogenously
added isopentenol. Genes conferring isopentenol tolerance phenotypes belonged to 
diverse functional groups, such as oxidative stress response (soxS, fpr, and
nrdH), general stress response (metR, yqhD, and gidB), heat shock-related
response (ibpA), and transport (mdlB). To determine if these genes could also
improve isopentenol production, we coexpressed the tolerance-enhancing genes
individually with an isopentenol production pathway. Our data show that
expression of 6 of the 8 candidates improved the production of isopentenol in E. 
coli, with the methionine biosynthesis regulator MetR improving the titer for
isopentenol production by 55%. Additionally, expression of MdlB, an ABC
transporter, facilitated a 12% improvement in isopentenol production. To our
knowledge, MdlB is the first example of a transporter that can be used to improve
production of a short-chain alcohol and provides a valuable new avenue for host
engineering in biogasoline production.IMPORTANCE: The use of microbial host
platforms for the production of bulk commodities, such as chemicals and fuels, is
now a focus of many biotechnology efforts. Many of these compounds are inherently
toxic to the host microbe, which in turn places a limit on production despite
efforts to optimize the bioconversion pathways. In order to achieve economically 
viable production levels, it is also necessary to engineer production strains
with improved tolerance to these compounds. We demonstrate that microbial
tolerance engineering using transcriptomics data can also identify targets that
improve production. Our results include an exporter and a methionine biosynthesis
regulator that improve isopentenol production, providing a starting point to
further engineer the host for biogasoline production.

Copyright © 2014 Foo et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01932-14 
PMCID: PMC4222104
PMID: 25370492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((soxS) AND (ompW)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Jan;138:103808. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103808. Epub 2019
Oct 18.

OmpW is positively regulated by iron via Fur, and negatively regulated by SoxS
contribution to oxidative stress resistance in Escherichia coli.

Zhang P(1), Ye Z(1), Ye C(1), Zou H(1), Gao Z(1), Pan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine,
School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou,
310018, China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine,
School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou,
310018, China. Electronic address: jianyi.pan@zstu.edu.cn.

Iron plays a central role at the interface of pathogen and host. The ability to
sequester iron from a host not only reduces host immune defenses but also
promotes pathogen virulence, leading to the occurrence of infectious disease.
Recently, outer membrane protein OmpW was shown to protect bacteria against harsh
environmental conditions and to play a role in infectious disease. The expression
of this versatile protein is controlled by iron, but the underlying mechanism of 
iron regulation has not been elucidated. In this study, the relation between OmpW
expression and iron was investigated. Our results demonstrated that expression of
OmpW is responsive to iron. Iron uptake analysis showed that an ompW mutant
strain has a strong requirement for iron as compared to wild type and the ompW
complemented strain. Moreover, ferric uptake regulation protein Fur, an iron
binding transcriptional factor, was downregulated under iron limitation
conditions and had a similar expression profile to OmpW in the presence or
absence of iron. Based on these results, we suggest that iron regulates OmpW by
binding to Fur. Furthermore, SoxS, a transcriptional factor involved in oxidative
stress, was found to negatively regulate OmpW. We found that downregulating or
knocking out OmpW results in bacterial resistance to oxidative stress. These
findings provide new insight into the regulation of OmpW expression by iron, and 
may represent a new mechanism contributing to iron-mediated infectious disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103808 
PMID: 31634530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors declare
no conflict of interest.


2. Front Microbiol. 2016 Apr 27;7:604. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604. eCollection
2016.

Regulation of the Two-Component Regulator CpxR on Aminoglycosides and β-lactams
Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Huang H(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan L(1), Pan Y(1), Gao Y(3), Ma C(1), Hu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University Zhengzhou,
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural UniversityZhengzhou, China;
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Institute of Science and
TechnologyXinxiang, China.
(3)Animal Husbandry Bureau of Henan Province Zhengzhou, China.

The two-component signal transduction system CpxAR is especially widespread in
Gram-negative bacteria. It has been reported that CpxAR contributes to the
multidrug resistance (MDR) in Escherichia coli. CpxR is a response regulator in
the two-component CpxAR system. The aim of this study was to explore the role of 
cpxR in the MDR of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. The minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics commonly used in veterinary medicine
for strains JS (a multidrug-susceptible standard strain of S. enterica serovar
Typhimurium), JSΔcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR, JSΔcpxR/pcpxR (*), JSΔcpxRΔacrB,
JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR, JSΔcpxRΔacrB/pcpxR (*), 9 S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
isolates (SH1-9), and SH1-9ΔcpxR were determined by the 2-fold broth
microdilution method. The relative mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW,
ompD, tolC, acrB, acrD, acrF, mdtA, marA, and soxS in strains JS, JSΔcpxR, and
JSΔcpxR/pcpxR were detected by real-time PCR. The results showed 2- to 4-fold
decreases in the MICs of amikacin (AMK), gentamycin (GEN), apramycin (APR),
neomycin (NEO), ceftriaxone (CRO), ceftiofur (CEF), and cefquinome (CEQ) for
strain JSΔcpxR, as compared to those for the parental strain JS. Likewise,
SH1-9ΔcpxR were found to have 2- to 8-fold reduction in resistance to the above
antibiotics, except for NEO, as compared to their parental strains SH1-9.
Furthermore, 2- to 4-fold further decreases in the MICs of AMK, GEN, APR, and CEF
for strain JSΔcpxRΔacrB were observed, as compared to those for strain JSΔacrB.
In addition, CpxR overproduction in strain JSΔcpxR led to significant decreases
in the mRNA expression levels of ompF, ompC, ompW, ompD, tolC, acrB, marA, and
soxS, and significant increases in those of stm3031 and stm1530. Notably, after
all strains were induced simultaneously by GEN to the 15th passage at
subinhibitory concentrations, strain JSΔcpxR/pcpxR showed significant increases
in mRNA expression levels of the efflux pump acrD and mdtA genes, as compared to 
strain JSΔcpxR. Our results indicate that the two-component regulator CpxR
contributes to resistance of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium to aminoglycosides
and β-lactams by influencing the expression level of the MDR-related genes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00604 
PMCID: PMC4846824
PMID: 27199934 


############# ((soxS) AND (glpX)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Feb;69(2):390-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkt352. Epub 2013 
Sep 15.

Regulation of acrAB expression by cellular metabolites in Escherichia coli.

Ruiz C(1), Levy SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance and the Department of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Multidrug efflux pumps mediate resistance to antibiotics and other
toxic compounds. We studied the role of AcrAB-TolC, the main efflux pump in
Escherichia coli, in regulating gene expression.
METHODS: Deletion mutants, an acrABp-lacZ fusion and reverse
transcription-real-time quantitative PCR experiments were used to study the role 
of AcrAB-TolC and metabolism in regulating gene expression of the acrAB operon
and its transcriptional regulators.
RESULTS: Deletion of the acrB gene increased the expression of the acrAB operon. 
A similar induction of acrAB was found when acrA or tolC was deleted, and when
the pump function was inhibited using phenylalanine-arginine-β-naphthylamide. The
induction of acrAB in the ΔacrB strain was totally (AcrR or SoxS) or partially
(SoxR or MarA) prevented when the genes for these acrAB regulators were also
deleted. The expression of soxS and marA, but not of acrR, was increased in the
ΔacrB strain, which also showed altered expression of many other genes related to
different cellular processes, including motility. Deletion of the metabolic genes
entA and entE (enterobactin biosysnthesis), glpX (gluconeogenesis), cysH
(cysteine biosynthesis) and purA (purine biosynthesis) also prevented activation 
of the acrAB promoter in the ΔacrB strain. Addition of the enterobactin
biosynthesis intermediate metabolite 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate induced the expression
of acrAB.
CONCLUSIONS: These results together suggest a model in which the AcrAB-TolC pump 
effluxes cellular metabolites that are toxic and/or have a signalling role. If
the pump is inactivated or inhibited, these metabolites would accumulate,
inactivating AcrR and/or up-regulating soxS and marA expression, ultimately
triggering the up-regulation of acrAB expression to restore homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkt352 
PMCID: PMC3886929
PMID: 24043404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nsrR) AND (mipA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Bacteriol. 2007 Jun;189(11):4243-56. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

SigmaE regulates and is regulated by a small RNA in Escherichia coli.

Thompson KM(1), Rhodius VA, Gottesman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

RybB is a small, Hfq-binding noncoding RNA originally identified in a screen of
conserved intergenic regions in Escherichia coli. Fusions of the rybB promoter to
lacZ were used to screen plasmid genomic libraries and genomic transposon mutants
for regulators of rybB expression. A number of plasmids, including some carrying 
rybB, negatively regulated the fusion. An insertion in the rep helicase and one
upstream of dnaK decreased expression of the fusion. Multicopy suppressors of
these insertions led to identification of two plasmids that stimulated the
fusion. One contained the gene for the response regulator OmpR; the second
contained mipA, encoding a murein hydrolase. The involvement of MipA and OmpR in 
cell surface synthesis suggested that the rybB promoter might be dependent on
sigma(E). The sequence upstream of the +1 of rybB contains a consensus sigma(E)
promoter. The activity of rybB-lacZ was increased in cells lacking the RseA
anti-sigma factor and when sigma(E) was overproduced from a heterologous
promoter. The activity of rybB-lacZ and the detection of RybB were totally
abolished in an rpoE-null strain. In vitro, sigma(E) efficiently transcribes from
this promoter. Both a rybB mutation and an hfq mutation significantly increased
expression of both rybB-lacZ and rpoE-lacZ fusions, consistent with negative
regulation of the sigma(E) response by RybB and other small RNAs. Based on the
plasmid screens, NsrR, a repressor sensitive to nitric oxide, was also found to
negatively regulate sigma(E)-dependent promoters in an RseA-independent fashion.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00020-07 
PMCID: PMC1913397
PMID: 17416652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nsrR) AND (nirB)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Dec;325(2):108-14. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02385.x. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

NsrR-dependent method for detecting nitric oxide accumulation in the Escherichia 
coli cytoplasm and enzymes involved in NO production.

Vine CE(1), Purewal SK, Cole JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

A β-galactosidase assay for detecting the accumulation of NO in the Escherichia
coli cytoplasm has been developed based on the sensitive response of the
transcription repressor, NsrR, to NO. The hcp promoter is repressed by NsrR in
the absence of nitric oxide, but repression is relieved when NO accumulates in
the cytoplasm. Most, but not all, of this NO is formed by the interaction of the 
membrane-associated nitrate reductase, NarG, with nitrite. External NO at
physiologically relevant concentrations does not equilibrate across the E. coli
membrane with NsrR in the cytoplasm. The periplasmic nitrite reductase, NrfAB, is
not required to prevent equilibration of NO across the membrane. External NO
supplied at the highest concentration reported to occur in vivo does not damage
FNR sufficiently to affect transcription from the hcp or hmp promoters or from a 
synthetic promoter. We suggest that the capacity of E. coli to reduce NO is
sufficient to prevent its accumulation from external sources in the cytoplasm.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02385.x 
PMID: 22092912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11146-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200. Epub 2008
Feb 18.

Nitric oxide homeostasis in Salmonella typhimurium: roles of respiratory nitrate 
reductase and flavohemoglobin.

Gilberthorpe NJ(1), Poole RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

Nitric oxide (NO) is generated in biological systems primarily via the activity
of NO synthases and nitrate and nitrite reductases. Here we show that Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium) grown anaerobically with nitrate is
capable of generating polarographically detectable NO after nitrite (NO(2)(-))
addition. NO accumulation is sensitive to the NO scavenger
2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide. Neither an fnr
mutant nor an fnr hmp double mutant produces NO, indicating the involvement in NO
evolution from NO(2)(-) of protein(s) positively regulated by FNR. Contrary to
previous findings in Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that neither the
periplasmic nitrite reductase (NrfA) nor the cytoplasmic nitrite reductase (NirB)
is involved in NO production in S. typhimurium. However, mutant cells lacking the
membrane-bound nitrate reductase, NarGHI, and membranes derived from these cells 
are unable to produce NO, demonstrating that, in wild-type S. typhimurium, this
enzyme is responsible for NO production. Membrane terminal oxidases cannot
account for the NO levels measured. The nitrate reductase inhibitor, azide,
abrogates NO evolution by Salmonella, and production of NO occurs only in the
absence from the assays of nitrate; both features reveal a marked similarity
between the NO-generating activities of this bacterium and plants. Unlike the
situation in E. coli, an S. typhimurium hmp mutant produces NO both aerobically
and anaerobically. Under aerobic conditions, when a functional flavohemoglobin is
present, no NO is detectable. We propose a homeostatic mechanism in S.
typhimurium, in which NO produced from NO(2)(-) by nitrate reductase derepresses 
Hmp expression (via FNR and NsrR) and NorV expression (via NorR) and thus limits 
NO toxicity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708019200 
PMID: 18285340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecR) AND (fecI)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100673. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673. Epub 2021
Apr 16.

The Escherichia coli S2P intramembrane protease RseP regulates ferric citrate
uptake by cleaving the sigma factor regulator FecR.

Yokoyama T(1), Niinae T(2), Tsumagari K(2), Imami K(2), Ishihama Y(2), Hizukuri
Y(3), Akiyama Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yhizukur@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. Electronic address: yakiyama@infront.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Escherichia coli RseP, a member of the site-2 protease family of intramembrane
proteases, is involved in the activation of the σE extracytoplasmic stress
response and elimination of signal peptides from the cytoplasmic membrane.
However, whether RseP has additional cellular functions is unclear. In this
study, we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis to search 
for new substrates that might reveal unknown physiological roles for RseP. Our
data showed that the levels of several Fec system proteins encoded by the
fecABCDE operon (fec operon) were significantly decreased in an RseP-deficient
strain. The Fec system is responsible for the uptake of ferric citrate, and the
transcription of the fec operon is controlled by FecI, an alternative sigma
factor, and its regulator FecR, a single-pass transmembrane protein. Assays with 
a fec operon expression reporter demonstrated that the proteolytic activity of
RseP is essential for the ferric citrate-dependent upregulation of the fec
operon. Analysis using the FecR protein and FecR-derived model proteins showed
that FecR undergoes sequential processing at the membrane and that RseP
participates in the last step of this sequential processing to generate the
N-terminal cytoplasmic fragment of FecR that participates in the transcription of
the fec operon with FecI. A shortened FecR construct was not dependent on RseP
for activation, confirming this cleavage step is the essential and sufficient
role of RseP. Our study unveiled that E. coli RseP performs the intramembrane
proteolysis of FecR, a novel physiological role that is essential for regulating 
iron uptake by the ferric citrate transport system.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100673 
PMCID: PMC8144685
PMID: 33865858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


2. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00541-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00541-19. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Ferric Citrate Regulator FecR Is Translocated across the Bacterial Inner Membrane
via a Unique Twin-Arginine Transport-Dependent Mechanism.

Passmore IJ(1), Dow JM(1), Coll F(1), Cuccui J(1), Palmer T(2), Wren BW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom brendan.wren@lshtm.ac.uk.

In Escherichia coli, citrate-mediated iron transport is a key nonheme pathway for
the acquisition of iron. Binding of ferric citrate to the outer membrane protein 
FecA induces a signal cascade that ultimately activates the cytoplasmic sigma
factor FecI, resulting in transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport 
genes. Central to this process is signal transduction mediated by the inner
membrane protein FecR. FecR spans the inner membrane through a single
transmembrane helix, which is flanked by cytoplasm- and periplasm-orientated
moieties at the N and C termini. The transmembrane helix of FecR resembles a
twin-arginine signal sequence, and the substitution of the paired arginine
residues of the consensus motif decouples the FecR-FecI signal cascade, rendering
the cells unable to activate transcription of the fec operon when grown on ferric
citrate. Furthermore, the fusion of beta-lactamase C-terminal to the FecR
transmembrane helix results in translocation of the C-terminal domain that is
dependent on the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) system. Our findings
demonstrate that FecR belongs to a select group of bitopic inner membrane
proteins that contain an internal twin-arginine signal sequence.IMPORTANCE Iron
is essential for nearly all living organisms due to its role in metabolic
processes and as a cofactor for many enzymes. The FecRI signal transduction
pathway regulates citrate-mediated iron import in many Gram-negative bacteria,
including Escherichia coli The interactions of FecR with the outer membrane
protein FecA and cytoplasmic anti-sigma factor FecI have been extensively
studied. However, the mechanism by which FecR inserts into the membrane has not
previously been reported. In this study, we demonstrate that the targeting of
FecR to the cytoplasmic membrane is dependent on the Tat system. As such, FecR
represents a new class of bitopic Tat-dependent membrane proteins with an
internal twin-arginine signal sequence.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00541-19 
PMCID: PMC7148137
PMID: 32015149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Bacteriol. 2020 Apr 9;202(9). pii: e00058-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00058-20. Print
2020 Apr 9.

Novel Tat-Dependent Protein Secretion.

Braun V(1), Hantke K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Department of Protein
Evolution, Tübingen, Germany volkmar.braun@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(2)IMID Institute, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The transcription initiation signal elicited by the binding of ferric citrate to 
the outer membrane FecA protein is transmitted by the FecR protein across the
cytoplasmic membrane to the FecI extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor. In
this issue of Journal of Bacteriology, I. J. Passmore, J. M. Dow, F. Coll, J.
Cuccui, et al. (J Bacteriol 202:e00541-19, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00541-19) report that the FecR sequence contains both 
the twin-arginine signal motif and the secretory (Sec) avoidance motif typical of
proteins secreted by the twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system. The same study
shows that FecR is indeed secreted by Tat and represents a new class of bitopic
Tat-dependent membrane proteins.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00058-20 
PMCID: PMC7148135
PMID: 32015148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biometals. 2006 Apr;19(2):103-13.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen, 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe2+ bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe2+, the fecI
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-8253-y 
PMID: 16718597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biometals. 2005 Oct;18(5):507-17.

Gene regulation by transmembrane signaling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, Tübingen 72096, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Studies of the ferric citrate transport genes in Escherichia coli K-12 have
revealed a novel type of transcriptional regulation. The inducer, ferric citrate,
binds to an outer membrane protein and must not be transported into the cells to 
initiate transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes. Rather, a signaling
cascade from the cell surface across the outer membrane, the periplasm, and the
cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm transmits information on the presence of 
the inducer in the culture medium into the cytoplasm, where gene transcription
occurs. The outer membrane protein FecA serves as a signal receiver and as a
signal transmitter across the outer membrane. The FecR protein serves as a signal
receiver in the periplasm and as a signal transmitter across the cytoplasmic
membrane into the cytoplasm, where the FecI sigma factor is activated to bind RNA
polymerase and specifically initiate transcription of the fecABCDE transport
genes by binding to the promoter upstream of the fecA gene. Transcription of the 
fecI fecR regulatory genes is repressed by Fe(2+) bound to the Fur repressor
protein. Under iron-limiting conditions, Fur is not loaded with Fe(2+), the fecI 
and fecR genes are transcribed, and the FecI and FecR proteins are synthesized
and respond to the presence of ferric citrate in the medium when ferric citrate
binds to the FecA protein. Regulation of the fec genes represents the paradigm of
a growing number of gene regulation systems involving transmembrane signaling
across three cellular compartments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-005-3497-0 
PMID: 16333751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Microbiol. 2005 Nov;184(3):175-86. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Occurrence and regulation of the ferric citrate transport system in Escherichia
coli B, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes, and Photorhabdus
luminescens.

Mahren S(1), Schnell H, Braun V.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

In Escherichia coli K-12, transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes
fecABCDE is initiated by binding of diferric dicitrate to the outer membrane
protein FecA which elicits a signaling cascade from the cell surface to the
cytoplasm. The FecI sigma factor is only active in the presence of FecR, which
transfers the signal across the cytoplasmic membrane. In other bacteria, fecIRA
homologues control iron transport gene transcription by siderophores other than
citrate. However, in most cases, the FecI homologues are active in the absence of
the FecR homologues, which might function as anti-sigma factors. Since not all E.
coli strains contain a fec system, we determined the occurrence of fec genes in
selected Enterobacteriaceae and the dependence of FecI activity on FecR.
Incomplete FecIRA systems were chromosomally encoded in Enterobacter aerogenes
strains and plasmid-encoded in K. pneumoniae. E. coli B, Photorhabdus luminescens
and one of three Klebsiella pneumoniae strains had a functional FecIRA regulatory
system as in E. coli K-12. The cytoplasmic N-terminal FecR fragments caused
constitutive FecI activity in the absence of ferric citrate. The PCR-generated
mutant FecI(D40G) was inactive and FecI(S15P) was partially active. FecR of E.
coli K-12 activated FecI of all tested strains except FecI encoded on the
virulence plasmid pLVPK of K. pneumoniae, which differed from E. coli K-12 FecI
by having mutations in region 4, which is important for interaction with FecR.
The C-terminally truncated FecR homologue of pLVPK was inactive. pLVPK-encoded
FecA contains a 38-residue sequence in front of the signal sequence that did not 
prevent processing and proper integration of FecA into the outer membrane of E.
coli and lacks the signaling sequence required for transcription initiation of
the fec transport genes, making it induction-incompetent but transport-competent.
The evidence indicates that fecIRABCDE genes are acquired by horizontal DNA
transfer and can undergo debilitating mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-005-0035-y 
PMID: 16193283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2005 Sep;29(4):673-84. Epub 2004 Oct 29.

Transmembrane transcriptional control (surface signalling) of the Escherichia
coli Fec type.

Braun V(1), Mahren S.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Germany.
volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

The ferric citrate transport system of Escherichia coli is the first example of a
transcription initiation mechanism that starts at the cell surface. The inducer, 
ferric citrate, binds to an outer membrane transport protein, and without further
transport elicits a signal that is transmitted across the outer membrane, the
periplasm, and the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm. Signal transfer
across the three subcellular compartments is mediated by the outer membrane
transport protein that interacts in the periplasm with a cytoplasmic
transmembrane protein. The latter is required for activation of a sigma factor
which belongs to the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor family. A similar
kind of transcription regulation has been demonstrated in Pseudomonas putida, P. 
aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Aerobacter aerogenes,
Bordetella pertussis, B. bronchseptica, B. avium, and Ralstonia solanacearum. The
genomes of P. putida, P. aeruginosa, Nitrosomonas europaea, Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron and Caulobacter crescentus predict the existence of many more
such transcriptional regulatory devices.

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsre.2004.10.001 
PMID: 16102597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jul;185(13):3745-52.

Sites of interaction between the FecA and FecR signal transduction proteins of
ferric citrate transport in Escherichia coli K-12.

Enz S(1), Brand H, Orellana C, Mahren S, Braun V.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

Erratum in
    J Bacteriol. 2003 Nov;185(21):6494.

Transcription of the fecABCDE ferric citrate transport genes of Escherichia coli 
K-12 is initiated by a signaling cascade from the cell surface into the
cytoplasm. FecR receives the signal in the periplasm from the outer membrane
protein FecA loaded with ferric citrate, transmits the signal across the
cytoplasmic membrane, and converts FecI in the cytoplasm to an active sigma
factor. In this study, it was shown through the use of a bacterial two-hybrid
system that, in the periplasm, the C-terminal FecR(237-317) fragment interacts
with the N-terminal FecA(1-79) fragment. In the same C-terminal region, amino
acid residues important for the interaction of FecR with FecA were identified by 
random and site-directed mutagenesis. They were preferentially located in and
around a leucine motif (residues 247 to 268) which was found to be highly
conserved in FecR-like proteins. The degree of residual binding of FecR mutant
proteins to FecA was correlated with the degree of transcription initiation in
response to ferric citrate in the culture medium. Three randomly generated
inactive FecR mutants, FecR(L254E), FecR(L269G), and FecR(F284L), were suppressed
to different degrees by the mutants FecA(G39R) and FecR(D43E). One FecR mutant,
FecR (D138E, V197A), induced fecA promoter-directed transcription constitutively 
in the absence of ferric citrate and bound more strongly than wild-type FecR to
FecA. The data showed that FecR interacts in the periplasm with FecA to confer
ferric citrate-induced transcription of the fec transport genes and identified
sites in FecR and FecA that are important for signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.13.3745-3752.2003 
PMCID: PMC161571
PMID: 12813067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2003 Apr;6(2):173-80.

Regulation of the FecI-type ECF sigma factor by transmembrane signalling.

Braun V(1), Mahren S, Ogierman M.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universtat Tuebingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

Induction of the ferric citrate transport genes of Escherichia coli K-12 involves
a signalling cascade that starts at the cell surface and proceeds to the
cytoplasm. Three specific proteins are involved: FecA in the outer membrane, FecR
in the cytoplasmic membrane, and FecI in the cytoplasm. The binding of dinuclear 
ferric citrate to FecA causes substantial structural changes in FecA, triggering 
the signal cascade. The amino-proximal end of FecA interacts with the
carboxy-proximal end of FecR in the periplasm. FecR then transmits the signal
across the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm and activates the FecI sigma
factor, which binds to the RNA polymerase core enzyme and directs the RNA
polymerase to the promoter upstream of the fecABCDE transport genes to initiate
transcription. Transcription of the fecIR regulatory genes and the fec transport 
genes is repressed by the Fur protein loaded with Fe(2+). Therefore,
transcription of the fec transport genes is subjected to double control: cells
first detect iron deficiency and respond by synthesis of the regulatory proteins 
FecI and FecR, which initiate transcription of the fec transport genes, provided 
ferric citrate is available. FecI belongs to the extracytoplasmic function sigma 
factors, which are widespread among bacteria. With the recent sequencing of
complete microbial genomes, it has become apparent that the FecIRA cascade is now
a paradigm for the regulatory control of FecI family sigmas in Gram-negative
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/s1369-5274(03)00022-5 
PMID: 12732308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((fecI) AND (fhuA)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Biometals. 2007 Jun;20(3-4):219-31. Epub 2007 Mar 17.

Energy-coupled outer membrane transport proteins and regulatory proteins.

Braun V(1), Endriss F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology/Membrane Physiology, University of Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle
28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de

FhuA and FecA are two examples of energy-coupled outer membrane import proteins
of gram-negative bacteria. FhuA transports iron complexed by the siderophore
ferrichrome and serves as a receptor for phages, a toxic bacterial peptide, and a
toxic protein. FecA transports diferric dicitrate and regulates transcription of 
an operon encoding five ferric citrate (Fec) transport genes. Properties of FhuA 
mutants selected according to the FhuA crystal structure are described. FhuA
mutants in the TonB box, the hatch, and the beta-barrel are rather robust. TonB
box mutants in FhuA FecA, FepA, Cir, and BtuB are compared; some mutations are
suppressed by mutations in TonB. Mutant studies have not revealed a ferrichrome
diffusion pathway, and tolerance to mutations in the region linking the TonB box 
to the hatch does not disclose a mechanism for how energy transfer from the
cytoplasmic membrane to FhuA changes the conformation of FhuA such that bound
substrates are released, the pore is opened, and substrates enter the periplasm, 
or how surface loops change their conformation such that TonB-dependent phages
bind irreversibly and release their DNA into the cells. The FhuA and FecA crystal
structures do not disclose the mechanism of these proteins, but they provide
important information for specific functional studies. FecA is also a regulatory 
protein that transduces a signal from the cell surface into the cytoplasm. The
interacting subdomains of the proteins in the FecA --> FecR --> FecI --> RNA
polymerase signal transduction pathway resulting in fecABCDE transcription have
been determined. Energy-coupled transporters transport not only iron and vitamin 
B12, but also other substrates of very low abundance such as sugars across the
outer membrane; transcription regulation of the transport genes may occur
similarly to that of the Fec transport genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-006-9072-5 
PMID: 17370038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


############# ((nadR) AND (nadC)) AND ((E. coli) OR (Escherichia coli)) #############


1. Metab Eng. 2021 Sep;67:164-172. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2021.06.007. Epub 2021 Jun
27.

Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for quinolinic acid production by
assembling L-aspartate oxidase and quinolinate synthase as an enzyme complex.

Zhu F(1), Peña M(1), Bennett GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA.
(2)Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA;
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
TX, 77005, USA. Electronic address: gbennett@rice.edu.

Quinolinic acid (QA) is a key intermediate of nicotinic acid (Niacin) which is an
essential human nutrient and widely used in food and pharmaceutical industries.
In this study, a quinolinic acid producer was constructed by employing
comprehensive engineering strategies. Firstly, the quinolinic acid production was
improved by deactivation of NadC (to block the consumption pathway), NadR (to
eliminate the repression of L-aspartate oxidase and quinolinate synthase), and
PtsG (to slow the glucose utilization rate and achieve a more balanced
metabolism, and also to increase the availability of the precursor
phosphoenolpyruvate). Further modifications to enhance quinolinic acid production
were investigated by increasing the oxaloacetate pool through overproduction of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and deactivation of acetate-producing pathway
enzymes. Moreover, quinolinic acid production was accelerated by assembling NadB 
and NadA as an enzyme complex with the help of peptide-peptide interaction
peptides RIAD and RIDD, which resulted in up to 3.7 g/L quinolinic acid being
produced from 40 g/L glucose in shake-flask cultures. A quinolinic acid producer 
was constructed in this study, and these results lay a foundation for further
engineering of microbial cell factories to efficiently produce quinolinic acid
and subsequently convert this product to nicotinic acid for industrial
applications.

Copyright © 2021 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2021.06.007 
PMID: 34192552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

